IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  A Survey on Metaverse: Fundamentals, Yuntao Wang , Zhou Su , Senior Member, IEEE, Ning Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Rui Xing , Dongxiao Liu , Member, IEEE, Tom H. Luan , Senior Member, IEEE, Abstract—Metaverse, as an evolving paradigm of the next- generation Internet, aims to build a fully immersive, hyper spatiotemporal, and self-sustaining virtual shared space for humans to play, work, and socialize. Driven by recent advances in emerging technologies such as extended reality, artiﬁcial intelligence, and blockchain, metaverse is stepping from sci- ence ﬁction to an upcoming reality. However, severe privacy invasions and security breaches (inherited from underlying tech- nologies or emerged in the new digital ecology) of metaverse can impede its wide deployment. At the same time, a series of fun- damental challenges (e.g., scalability and interoperability) can arise in metaverse security provisioning owing to the intrinsic characteristics of metaverse, such as immersive realism, hyper spatiotemporality, sustainability, and heterogeneity. In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey of the fundamentals, secu- rity, and privacy of metaverse. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst investigate a novel distributed metaverse architecture and its key characteris- tics with ternary-world interactions. Then, we discuss the security and privacy threats, present the critical challenges of metaverse systems, and review the state-of-the-art countermeasures. Finally, we draw open research directions for building future metaverse Index Terms—Metaverse, security, privacy, distributed virtual worlds, extended reality, artiﬁcial intelligence, blockchain. T HE METAVERSE, literally a combination of the preﬁx “meta” (meaning transcendence) and the sufﬁx “verse” (shorthand for universe), is a computer-generated world with a consistent value system and an independent economic system linked to the physical world. The term metaverse was cre- ated by Neal Stephenson in his science ﬁction novel named Snow Crash in . In this novel, humans in the physical world enter and live in the metaverse (a parallel virtual world) through digital avatars (in analogy to user’s physical self) via Manuscript received  February ; revised  July ; accepted  August . Date of publication  September ; date of cur- rent version  February . This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant U20A20175 and Grant U1808207, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. (Corresponding Yuntao Wang, Zhou Su, Rui Xing, and Tom H. Luan are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an , China (e-mail: zhousu@ieee.org). Ning Zhang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON N9B 3P4, Canada. Dongxiao Liu and Xuemin Shen are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Digital Object Identiﬁer virtual reality (VR) equipment. Since its ﬁrst appearance, the concept of metaverse is still evolving with various descrip- tions, such as a second life [], 3D virtual worlds [], and life-logging []. Commonly, the metaverse is regarded as a fully immersive, hyper spatiotemporal, and self-sustaining vir- tual shared space blending the ternary physical, human, and digital worlds []. Metaverse is recognized as an evolving paradigm of the next-generation Internet after the Web and the mobile Internet revolutions [], where users can live as digital natives and experience an alternative life in virtuality. The metaverse integrates a variety of emerging technolo- gies [], [], []. In particular, digital twin produces a mirror image of the real world, VR and augmented reality (AR) pro- vide immersive 3D experience, 5G and beyond offer ultra-high reliable and ultra-low latency connections for massive meta- verse devices, wearable sensors and brain-computer interface (BCI) enable user/avatar interaction in the metaverse, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) enables the large-scale metaverse creation and rendering, and blockchain and non-fungible token (NFT) play an important role in determining authentic rights for metaverse assets []. Currently, with the popularity of smart devices and the maturity of enabling technologies, the meta- verse is stepping out of its infancy into an upcoming reality in the near future. Furthermore, signiﬁcant innovations and advances in the above emerging technologies are giving birth to a new information ecology and new demands for appli- cations, as well as the metaverse for becoming a platform of the new ecology and applications []. Driven by realistic demands and the prospect of feasibility of metaverse construc- tion, metaverse recently has attracted increasing attention from around the world and many tech giants such as Facebook, Microsoft, Tencent, and NVIDIA have announced their ven- tures into Metaverse. Particularly, Facebook rebranded itself as “Meta” to dedicate itself to building the future metaverse []. Generally, the development of metaverse consists of three successive phases from a macro perspective []: (i) digital twins, (ii) digital natives, and eventually (iii) surreality, as depicted in Fig. . The ﬁrst phase produces a mirror world con- sisting of large-scale and high-ﬁdelity digital twins of humans and things in virtual environments, aimed for a vivid digi- tal representation of the physical reality. In this phase, virtual activities and properties such as user emotion and movement are imitations of their physical counterparts, where reality and virtuality are two parallel spaces. The second phase mainly focuses on the native content creation, where digital natives -877X c(cid:)  IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  Fig. . Three phases of the development of the metaverse. represented by avatars can produce innovations and insights inside the digital worlds and these digital creations may only exist in the virtual spaces. In this phase, the massively cre- ated contents in the digital world become equal with their physical counterparts, and the digital world has the ability to transform and innovate the production process of the physical world, thereby creating more intersections between these two worlds. The metaverse grows to its maturity in the last phase and turns into a persistent and self-sustaining surreality world which assimilates the reality into itself. The seamless integra- tion and mutual symbiosis of physical and virtual worlds will be realized in this phase, where the scope of the virtual world will be larger than that of the real world and more scenes and lives that do not exist in reality can exist in virtual realms. A. Challenges for Securing Metaverse In spite of the promising sign of metaverse, security and privacy issues are the prime concerns that hinder its further development. A wide range of security breaches and privacy invasions may arise in the metaverse from the management of massive data streams, pervasive user proﬁling activities, unfair outcomes of AI algorithms, to the safety of physi- cal infrastructures and human bodies. Firstly, since metaverse integrates a variety of latest technologies and systems built on them as its basis, their vulnerabilities and intrinsic ﬂaws may also be inherited by the metaverse. There have been inci- dents of emerging technologies, such as hijacking of wearable devices or cloud storage, theft of virtual currencies, and the misconduct of AI to produce fake news. Secondly, driven by the interweaving of various technologies, the effects of existing threats can be ampliﬁed and become more severe in virtual worlds, while new threats nonexistent in physical and cyber spaces can breed such as virtual stalking and vir- tual spying []. Particularly, the personal data involved in the metaverse can be more granular and unprecedentedly ubiqui- tous to build a digital copy of the real world, which opens new horizons for crimes on private big data []. For exam- ple, to build a virtual scene using AI algorithms, users will inevitably wear wearable AR/VR devices with built-in sensors to comprehensively collect brain wave patterns, facial expres- sions, eye movements, hand movements, speech and biometric features, as well as the surrounding environment. Besides, as users need to be uniquely identiﬁed in the metaverse, it means that headsets, VR glasses, or other devices can be used for tracking users’ real locations illegally []. Lastly, hackers can exploit system vulnerabilities and compromise devices as entry points to invade real-world equipments such as house- hold appliances to threaten personal safety, and even threaten critical infrastructures such as power grid systems, high-speed rail systems, and water supply systems via advanced persistent Nevertheless, existing security countermeasures can still be ineffective and lack adaptability for metaverse applications. Particularly, the intrinsic characteristics of metaverse including immersiveness, hyper spatiotemporality, sustainability, inter- operability, scalability, and heterogeneity may bring about a series of challenges for efﬁcient security provision. ) The real-time fully immersive experience in the metaverse brings not only sensual pleasures of the ﬂawless virtual environ- ment, but also challenges in the secure fusion of massive multimodal user-sensitive big data for interactions between users and avatars/environments. ) The integration of the ternary world contributes to the hyper spatiotemporality in the metaverse [], which greatly increases the complexity and difﬁculty of trust management. Due to the deepening blurring of the boundary between the real and the virtual, the meta- verse will make the fact and ﬁction more confusing such as Deepfake events, especially for regulations and digital foren- sics. ) To avoid the single point of failure (SPoF) and the control by a few powerful entities, the metaverse should be built on a decentralized architecture to be self-sustaining and persistent [], which raises severe challenges in reaching unambiguous consensus among massive entities in the time- varying metaverse. ) The interoperability and scalability in the metaverse indicate that users can freely shuttle across var- ious sub-metaverses concurrently under different scenes and interaction modes, which also poses challenges to ensure fast service authorization, compliance auditing, and accountability enforcement in seamless service mitigation and multi-source data fusion. ) The virtual worlds in the large-scale metaverse can be highly heterogeneous in terms of hardware implemen- tation, communication interfaces, and softwares, which poses huge interoperability difﬁculties. The topic of metaverse has attracted various research attention. Until now, there have been several survey papers Dionisio et al. [] specify four characteristics of viable 3D virtual worlds (or metaverse) including ubiquity, realism, scalability, and interoperability, and discuss ongoing improve- ments of the underlying virtual world technology. Lee et al. [] review and examine eight fundamental technologies to build up the metaverse as well as its opportunities from six user- centric factors. Huynh-The et al. [] study the role of AI approaches in the foundation and development of the meta- verse. Yang et al. [] investigate the potential of AI and blockchain technologies for future metaverse construction. Ning et al. [] present a survey of the development status of metaverse in terms of national policies, industrial projects, infrastructures, supporting technologies, VR, and social meta- verse. Park and Kim [] discuss three components (i.e., hard- ware, software, and content) of metaverse and review the user interaction, implementation, and representative applications in the metaverse. Xu et al. [] present an in-depth survey on Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY the edge-enabled metaverse from communication, networking, computation, and blockchain perspectives. Leenes [] inves- tigate potential privacy risks in the online game Second Life from both social and legal perspectives. Different from the above existing surveys on the general metaverse [], [], [], [], [], AI-empowered metaverse [], [], edge-enabled metaverse [], or the potential in service provisioning in social VR/AR games [], retailing [], education [], social goods [], and computational arts [], we focus on the per- spective of metaverse security and privacy such as potential security/privacy threats, critical security/privacy challenges, and state-of-the-art defenses, etc. In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey on the fundamentals of metaverse, as well as the key challenges and solutions to build the secure and privacy-preserving metaverse. By discussing existing/potential solutions for the challenges facing the metaverse, our survey offers critical insights and useful guidelines for readers to better understand how these security/privacy threats could arise and be prevented in the metaverse. The contributions of this survey are four-fold. • We discuss the fundamentals of metaverse including the general architecture, key characteristics, and enabling technologies, as well as existing modern prototypes of • We investigate the security and privacy threats in the metaverse from seven aspects (i.e., authentication & access control, data management, privacy, network, econ- omy, governance, and physical/social effects) and discuss the critical challenges to address them. • We survey the state-of-the-art security and privacy coun- termeasures in both academic and industry and discuss their feasibility toward building the secure and privacy- • We outline open future research directions in building the secure, privacy-preserving, and efﬁcient metaverse realm. Table I summarizes the contribution of our work in com- parison to previous relevant surveys in the metaverse. Section II presents the standards, architecture, characteristics, supporting technologies, and current prototypes of the meta- verse. Sections III–IX present the taxonomy of security and privacy threats in the metaverse and discuss critical challenges and existing/potential solutions to resolve them from seven aspects. Then, we discuss open research issues in Section X. Finally, we draw the conclusions in Section XI. Fig.  illus- trates the organization of this survey. The key acronyms are In this section, we introduce the metaverse from the follow- ing aspects: existing standards, the general architecture, key characteristics, enabling technologies, potential applications, A. Existing Metaverse-Related Standards follows, we brieﬂy introduce two existing metaverse-related standards: ISO/IEC  [] and IEEE A COMPARISON OF CONTRIBUTION BETWEEN OUR SURVEY AND ) As the ﬁrst standardized framework for networked vir- tual environments (NVEs) in the metaverse, ISO/IEC  (MPEG-V) aims to standardize the interfaces between the real world and the virtual world, and among virtual worlds, to realize seamless information exchange, simultaneous reac- tions, and interoperability []. Its ﬁrst version was published in , and the latest 4th edition was released in . ISO/IEC  standards are applicable for a variety of metaverse-related business services, where the association of audiovisual information, rendered sensory effects, and char- acteristics of virtual objects (e.g., avatars and virtual items) can beneﬁt the interactions between virtual and real worlds. Fig.  illustrates the general architecture of ISO/IEC  ) ISO/IEC  standards mainly focus on the sen- sory effects and lack capability in offering general-purpose interfaces between virtual and real worlds. As a supplement to ISO/IEC  standards, IEEE  project launched in  aims to deﬁne standardized interfaces for synchronization of cyber and physical worlds []. By specifying information formats and application program interfaces (APIs) to control actuators and obtain sensory information, IEEE  standards offer foundations for building metaverse systems, where both virtual and real worlds can affect each other. Fig.  illustrates the general architecture of IEEE  standards. In Fig. , the sensory information and actuator-related information are exchanged between virtual and real worlds via IEEE . and IEEE . standards, respectively. Besides, the deﬁ- nition, synchronization, and mission control data are deﬁned by the IEEE . standard for digital things (i.e., virtual Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  Fig. . The architecture of ISO/IEC  (MPEG-V) standards []. R → V adaptation means the conversion of sensory data from the real world (RW) to virtual world (VW) object characteristics. V → R adaptation means the conversion of sensory effects from VW into actuator commands to RW. V → V adaptation means the conversion of native representations of information in a VW to the standard format. Fig. . The architecture of IEEE  standards []. IEEE ., IEEE ., and IEEE . specify the standards on sensor interface, actuator interface, and orchestration of digital synchronization, respectively. collaborate, and socialize with each other. The construction of metaverse blends the ternary physical, human, and digital worlds. Fig.  shows the general architecture of the metaverse with consideration of its intrinsic ternicity. In the following, we elaborate on the relationships between the three worlds, the components in the metaverse, and the information ﬂow of ) Human Society: The metaverse is regarded as human- centric []. Human users along with their inner psychologies and social interactions constitute the human world. Equipped with smart wearable devices (e.g., VR/AR helmets), humans can interact and control their digital avatars to play, work, socialize, and interact with other avatars or virtual entities in the metaverse via human-computer interaction (HCI) and extended reality (XR) technologies [] (as depicted in the ) Physical Infrastructures: The physical world offers sup- porting infrastructures (including sensing/control, communica- tion, computation, and storage infrastructures) to the metaverse to support multi-sensory data perception, transmission, pro- cessing, and caching, as well as physical control, thereby enabling efﬁcient interactions with both the digital and human worlds. Speciﬁcally, pervasive smart objects, sensors, and actu- ators constitute the sensing/control infrastructure to enable all-around and multimodal data perception from the environ- ment and human bodies and high-accuracy device control. Networking is provided via the communication infrastruc- ture consisting of various heterogeneous wireless or wired Fig. . Organization structure of this paper. Metaverse is a self-sustaining, hyper spatiotemporal, and 3D immersive virtual shared space, created by the convergence of physically persistent virtual space and virtually enhanced physical reality. In other words, the metaverse is a synthesized world which is composed of user-controlled avatars, digital things, virtual environments, and other computer-generated elements, where humans (represented by avatars) can use their virtual identity through any smart device to communicate, Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT ABBREVIATIONS IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER can offer certain kinds of virtual goods/services (e.g., gaming, social dating, online museum, and online concert) and virtual environments (e.g., game scenes and virtual cities) to users represented as digital avatars. • Digital avatars: Avatars refer to the digital representation of human users in the metaverse. A user can create var- ious avatars in different metaverse applications, and the produced avatars can be like a human shape, animals, • Virtual environments: Virtual environments refer to the simulated real or imaginary environments (consisting of 3D digital things and their attributes) in the meta- verse. Besides, the virtual environments in the metaverse can have distinct spatiotemporal dimensions (e.g., ancient times or future worlds) for users to experience • Virtual goods/services: Virtual goods refer to the trade- able commodities (e.g., skins, digital arts, and land parcels) produced by virtual service providers (VSPs) or the users in the metaverse. Virtual services in the meta- verse have a broad of scopes including digital market, digital currency, digital regulation, social service, etc. There are two main sources of information in the meta- verse: one is the input of the real world (i.e., the captured information and obtained knowledge from the real space digi- tally displayed in the virtual space), and the other is the output of virtual worlds (i.e., the information generated by avatars, digital objects, and metaverse services in the virtual space). For the massive ﬁne-grained metaverse data collected/generated in real time, efﬁcient authentication and access control should be enforced, as well as the data reliability, traceability, and privacy protection in the life-cycle of metaverse services. ) Metaverse Engine: The metaverse engine [] uses the big data from the real world as inputs to generate, maintain, and update the virtual world via the interactivity, AI, digital twin, and blockchain technologies. Particularly, with the assis- tance of XR and HCI (especially brain-computer interaction (BCI)) techniques, users situated in physical environments are able to immersively control their digital avatars in the meta- verse via their senses and bodies for diverse collective and social activities such as car racing, dating, and virtual item trading. The virtual economy as a spontaneous derivative of such digital creation activities of avatars can be built in the metaverse. AI algorithms perform personalized avatar/content Fig. . The architecture of metaverse in integration of the human, physical, networks (e.g., cellular communications, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) communications, and satellite communica- tions). Besides, powerful computation and storage capacities are provisioned via the computation and storage infrastructure assisted by cloud-edge-end computing []. For instance, a virtual world runs at a minimum rate of  frames per sec- ond [], posing huge computational demands and latency constraints (e.g., within /30th of a second at most) in rendering high-quality graphics for each avatar. ) Interconnected Virtual Worlds: According to ISO/IEC  and IEEE  standards [], [], the digital world can be composed of a series of interconnected distributed virtual worlds (i.e., sub-metaverses), and each sub-metaverse Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  creation, large-scale metaverse rending, and intelligent ser- vice offering to enrich the metaverse ecology. Besides, the knowledge derived via AI-based big data analytics can be ben- eﬁcial to perform simulating, digitalizing, and mirroring the real world via digital twin technology to produce vivid virtual environments for users to experience. Finally, the created dig- ital twins, as well as native contents created by avatars, can be transparently managed, uniquely tokenized, and monetized by the blockchain technology to enable trust-free trading and service offering, towards building the economic system and value system in the metaverse. More details of these enabling technologies are elaborated at Section II-D. In summary, information is the core resource of the meta- verse and the free data ﬂow in the ternary world makes the digital ecology, which eventually promotes the integration of virtual and actual worlds. Next, we discuss the information ﬂow in a single world and across different worlds, respectively. ) In-World Information Flow: The human society or human world is interconnected by social networks and formed based on common activities and mutual interactions among the IoT-enabled sensing/control ing/transforming the physical world via pervasive sensors and actuators, and the generated IoT big data is transmitted and processed via network and computation infrastructures. In the digital world, the produced digital information of physical and human worlds are processed and managed via the metaverse engine to support large-scale metaverse cre- ation/rendering and various metaverse services. Besides, users, represented as avatars, can produce and distribute digital cre- ations across various sub-metaverses to promote the creativity ) Information Flow Across Worlds: As depicted in Fig. , the subjective consciousness, the Internet, and the IoT are the main media among the three worlds. (i) Humans can interact with physical objects via HCI technology and experience vir- tually augmented reality (e.g., holographic telepresence) via XR technology. (ii) The human world and the digital world are connected through the Internet, i.e., the largest computer network in the world. Users can interact with the digital world via smart devices such as smartphones, wearable sen- sors, and VR helmets, for the creation, sharing, and acquisition of knowledge. (iii) The IoT infrastructure bridges the physical world and the digital world by using inter-connected smart devices for digitalization, and thereby information can ﬂow freely between the two worlds []. Besides, the feedback information from the digital world (e.g., processed results of big data and intelligent decisions) can guide the transforma- tion (e.g., manufacturing process) of the physical world. As the metaverse blends physical systems, human society, and cyber worlds, threats in virtual worlds can be ampliﬁed and severely affect physical infrastructures and personal safety, which also raises huge governance demands and challenges. C. Key Characteristics of Metaverse Fig. . General network architecture and key characteristics of the metaverse. (i.e., mobile Internet), users are both content producers and consumers, and the websites turn into platforms for service offering. Typical such platforms include Wikipedia, WeChat, and TikTok. Metaverse is recognized as the evolving paradigm of Web .. In metaverse, as shown in Fig. , users repre- sented as digital avatars can seamlessly shuttle across various virtual worlds (i.e., sub-metaverses) to experience a digital life, as well as make digital creations and economic interac- tions, supported by physical infrastructures and the metaverse engine. Speciﬁcally, metaverse exhibits unique features from ) Immersiveness: The immersiveness means to allow users to feel psychologically and emotionally immersed []. It can be also called immersive realism []. According to the perspective of realism, human beings interact through their senses and their bod- ies. The immersive realism can be approached through the structure of sensory perception (e.g., sight, sound, temperature, and balance) and expression (e.g., gestures). ) Hyper Spatiotemporality: The real world is restricted by the ﬁniteness of space and the irreversibility of time. As metaverse is a virtual space-time continuum parallel to the real one, the hyper spatiotemporality refers to the break of limitations of time and space []. As such, users can freely shuttle across various worlds with different spatiotemporal dimensions to experience an alternate life with seamless scene ) Sustainability: The sustainability indicates metaverse maintains a closed economic loop and a consis- tent value system with a high level of independence. On the one hand, it should be open, i.e., continuously arousing users’ enthusiasm in digital content creation as well as open inno- vations. On the other hand, to remain persistent, it should be built on a decentralized architecture to get rid of SPoF risks and prevent from being controlled by a few powerful entities. ) Interoperability: The interoperability in the metaverse represents that (i) users can seamlessly move across vir- tual worlds (i.e., sub-metaverses) without interruption of the immersive experience []; and (ii) digital assets for rendering or reconstruction of virtual worlds are interchangeable across In Web ., Internet users are just content consumers, where contents are provided by the websites. In Web . ) Scalability: The scalability refers to the capacity of metaverse to remain efﬁcient with the number of concurrent Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY ) Digital Twin: Digital twin represents the digital clone of objects and systems in the real world with high ﬁdelity and consciousness []. It enables the mirroring of physi- cal entities, as well as prediction and optimization of their virtual bodies, by analyzing real-time streams of sensory data, physical models, and historical tal twin, data fed back from physical entities can be used for self-learning and self-adaption in the mirrored space. Moreover, digital twins can provide precise digital models of the expected objects with intended attributes in the metaverse with high accuracy through the simulation of complex phys- ical processes and the assistance of AI technologies, which is beneﬁcial for large-scale metaverse creation and rendering. Besides, digital twin enables predictive maintenance and acci- dent traceability for physical safety, due to the bidirectional connection between physical entities and their virtual counter- parts, thereby improving efﬁciency and reducing risks in the ) Networking: In the metaverse, networking technolo- gies such as 6G, software-deﬁned network (SDN), and IoT empower the ubiquitous network access and real-time mas- sive data transmission between real and virtual worlds, as well as between sub-metaverses. Beyond 5G (B5G) and 6G offer possibilities for ubiquitous, real-time, and ultra-reliable communications for massive metaverse devices with enhanced mobility support []. In 6G, space-air-ground integrated network (SAGIN) [] is a promising trend for seamless and ubiquitous network access to metaverse services. SDN enables the ﬂexible and scalable management of large-scale meta- verse networks via the separation of the control plane and data plane. In SDN-based metaverse, the physical devices and resources are managed by a logically centralized controller using a standardized interface such as OpenFlow, thereby vir- tualized computation, storage, and bandwidth resources can be dynamically allocated according to real-time demands of various sub-metaverses []. Besides, IoT is a network of numerous physical objects that are embedded with sensors, softwares, communication components, and other technologies with the aim to connect, exchange, and process data between things, systems, clouds, and users over the Internet. In the metaverse, IoT sensors are extensions of human senses. ) Ubiquitous Computing: Ubiquitous computing, or ubi- comp aims to create an environment where computing appears anytime and everywhere for users []. Through pervasive (often mobile) smart objects embedded in the environment or carried on the human body, ubiquitous computing enables smooth adaptation to the interactions between human users and the physical space. With ubicomp, instead of using spe- ciﬁc equipment (e.g., laptop), human users can freely interact with their avatars and experience real-time immersive meta- verse services via ubiquitous smart objects and network access in the environment. For improved users’ quality-of-experience (QoE) in ubicomp, the cloud-edge-end computing [] orches- trates the highly scalable cloud infrastructures (with powerful computation and storage capacity) and heterogeneous edge computing infrastructures (closer to end users/devices) via complex inner/inter-layer cooperation paradigms. As such, it allows ﬂexible and on-demand resource allocation to satisfy Fig. . The illustration of six underlying technologies including its roles and key components in the metaverse. users/avatars, the level of scene complexity, and the mode of user/avatar interactions (in terms of type, scope, and range) []. ) Heterogeneity: The heterogeneity of metaverse includes heterogeneous virtual spaces (e.g., with distinct implemen- tations), heterogeneous physical devices (e.g., with distinct interfaces), heterogeneous data types (e.g., unstructured and structured), heterogeneous communication modes (e.g., cellu- lar and satellite communications), as well as the diversity of human psychology. It also entails the poor interoperability of D. Enabling Technologies of Metaverse As shown in Fig. , there are the following six enabling technologies underlying the metaverse. ) Interactivity: With the maturity of miniaturized sen- sors, embedded technology, and XR technology, XR devices such as helmet-mounted displays (HMDs) are expected to be the main terminal for entering the metaverse []. The XR deeply incorporates virtual reality/augmented real- ity/mixed reality (VR/AR/MR) technologies to offer multi- sensory immersiveness, augmented experience, and real-time user/avatar/environment interaction via front-projected holo- graphic display, HCI (especially BCI), and large-scale 3D modeling []. Particularly, VR provides immersive experi- ences in a virtual world, AR delivers true presence experiences of virtual holograms, graphics, and videos in the real world, and MR offers a transition experience between VR and AR. The wearable XR devices perform ﬁne-grained human-speciﬁc information perception, as well as ubiquitous sensing for objects and surroundings, with the assistance of indoor smart devices (e.g., cameras). In this manner, the user/avatar inter- activity will no longer be limited to mobile inputs (e.g., hand-held phones and laptops), but all kinds of interactive devices connected to the metaverse. Besides, negative experi- ences such as dizziness in wearing XR helmets can be resolved by low-latency edge computing systems and AI-empowered Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  various requirements of end users/devices in different meta- ) AI: AI technology acts as the “brain” of metaverse which empowers personalized metaverse services (e.g., vivid and customized avatar creation), massive metaverse scene cre- ation and rendering, multilingual support in the metaverse by learning from massive multimodal input via big data infer- ence []. Moreover, AI enables smart interactions (e.g., smart shopping guide and user movement prediction) between user and avatar/NPC (non-player character) via intelligent decision- making. For example, by continuously learning users’ facial expressions, emotions, hairstyles, and so on, AI algorithms can create vivid and personalized avatars and intelligently recommend interested goods or information to users in the metaverse. More details of AI in the metaverse can refer to ) Blockchain: To be persistent, the metaverse should be constructed on a decentralized architecture to avoid centraliza- tion risks such as SPoF, low transparency, and control by a few entities []. Besides, the virtual economy and value system provided by the blockchain are essential components of the metaverse. As shown in Fig. , blockchain technologies offer an open and decentralized solution for building the sustainable virtual economy, as well as constructing the value system in the metaverse. Blockchain is a distributed ledger, in which data is structured into hash-chained blocks and featured with decen- tralization, immutability, transparency, and auditability []. The blockchain can be classiﬁed into three categories, i.e., public, consortium, and private, based on the decentralization degree []. The consensus protocols are the key component of blockchain, which determines the ledger consistency and system scalability. Besides, smart contracts can be deployed atop the blockchain to allow automatic function execution among distrustful parties in a prescribed fashion. NFT rep- resents irreplaceable and indivisible tokens [], which can identiﬁcation and ownership provenance in the blockchain. De-Fi stands for decentralized ﬁnance, which aims to deliver secure, transparent, and complex ﬁnancial services (e.g., stock/currency exchange) in the metaverse. E. Existing Modern Prototypes of Metaverse Applications In this subsection, we introduce existing representative prototypes in the following metaverse applications. ) Game: Game is the current hottest metaverse applica- tion. Considering the technological maturity, user matching, and content adaptability, games are an excellent way to explore the metaverse. We list some representative examples of metaverse games. The sandbox game Second Life1 offers a modiﬁable 3D virtual world where players can join in as avatars and create their virtual architectures and sell them, as well as participate in social activities such as art shows and even political gatherings and visiting embassy. Roblox2 is a global user-created game platform, in which players can create games and design items such as skins and clothes. It proposes eight key features of the metaverse: identity, friends, 2https://developer.roblox.com/en-us/ The role of blockchain technologies in bridging the conventional immersion, anywhere, diversity, low latency, economy, and civilization []. Fortnite3 is a massive multi-player online (MMO) shooter game designed by Epic Games, where players can build buildings and bunkers as well as construct islands, while the in-game items such as skins can only be designed ) Social Experience: Metaverse can revolutionize our society and enable a series of immersive social applications such as virtual lives, virtual shopping, virtual dating, virtual chatting, global travel, and even space/time travel. For exam- ple, Lil Nas X held a virtual concert on Roblox in , with over  million fans participating. Players can unlock special Lil Nas X goods in the digital store, e.g., commemo- rative items and emotions. Due to the COVID- situation, UC Berkeley celebrated graduation festivities virtually in Minecraft in  by digitally copying the campus scenery. Besides, Tencent developed a Digital Palace Museum4 in  which allows tourists to freely visit the palace museum and its exhibitions with a panoramic and immersive view by wearing ) Online Collaboration: Metaverse also opens new possi- bilities for immersive virtual collaboration in terms of telecom- muting in virtual workplaces, studying and learning in virtual classrooms, and panel discussion and meeting in virtual con- ference rooms. For example, Horizon Workroom5 is an ofﬁce collaboration software (run in Oculus Quest  helmet) released by Meta (parent company of Facebook), which allows people in any physical location to work and meet together in the same virtual room. Microsoft Mesh6 is an MR platform supported by Azure, which enables users working from multiple sites to cooperate virtually via holographic presence and shared experience from anywhere in a digital copy of their ofﬁce. ) Simulation and Design: Another promising application is 3D simulation, modeling, and architectural design on meta- verse. For example, NVIDIA has built its open platform named Omniverse7 to support multi-user real-time 3D simulation and 3https://www.epicgames.com/fortnite/en-US/home 4https://en.dpm.org.cn/about/news/--/.html 5https://www.theverge.com/////facebook-workrooms- 6https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/mesh 7https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/omniverse/ Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY Fig. . The taxonomy of security threats and corresponding security countermeasures in the metaverse. A SUMMARY OF CONTENT CREATION MODES IN THE METAVERSE visualization of physical objects and attributes in a shared vir- tual space for industrial applications, e.g., automotive design. Besides, Omniverse can be compatible with Disney Pixart’s open-source platform Universal Scene Description (USD). ) Creator Economy: The metaverse mainly includes four modes of content creation: professional-generated content (PGC), professional- and user-generated content (PUGC), (UGC), and AI-generated content (AIGC), as illustrated in Table III. In PGC mode, contents (e.g., games) are created by professional content producers on the platform, and ordinary users are just participants and con- tent viewers/experiencers. In UGC mode, all users produce contents and trade them freely in the marketplace provided by the platform, which is featured with high freedom degree, low cost, high diversiﬁcation, and decentralization []. Users are dominant in the content production process under the UGC mode. For example, creators of game scenes, skins, and items in Roblox can earn a certain percentage of Robux (i.e., vir- tual tokens exchangeable with real-world currency) paid by their experiencers, leading to a virtuous cycle. The PUGC mode is the combination of PGC and UGC modes, in which contents are jointly produced by professionals and ordinary users. In the metaverse, as the number of content consumers can be far greater than the number of content producers, the AIGC mode can help VSPs to create massive qualiﬁed and personalized contents with much-improved efﬁciency and much-reduced cost. In AIGC, there exist two types of content creation: (i) AI fully replaces users for content production; and (ii) AI assists users to produce contents. An example is that in the MetaHuman project [], Epic Games leverages AI algorithms to quickly create life-like virtual characters such as conversational virtual assistants. There are existing decentralized virtual worlds with a built- in creator economy supported by the Ethereum blockchain such as Decentraland8 and Cryptovoxels. In Decentraland, users can trade the land parcel and equipments in the mar- ketplace and build their own buildings as well as social games by calling the builder function, where the trading details are immutably recorded in Ethereum for auditablility. In Cryptovoxels, players can trade the lands and build vir- tual stores and art galleries in the virtual world “Origin City”. Besides, users can display and trade their digital assets such Table IV summarizes existing modern prototypes in differ- ent metaverse applications in terms of the six key character- In the next sections (i.e., from Section III to Section IX), based on existing surveys [], [], we classify a broad scope of security threats in the metaverse from the following seven dimensions: authentication & access control, data manage- ment, privacy, network, economy, physical/social effects, and governance. Moreover, we review existing/potential defense mechanisms for the above security and privacy threats in the metaverse. Fig.  depicts the proposed taxonomy of security threats and the corresponding security countermeasures in the III. THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES TO AUTHENTICATION AND ACCESS CONTROL IN METAVERSE In metaverse, identity authentication and access control play a vital role for massive users/avatars in metaverse service A. Threats to Authentication in Metaverse The identities of users/avatars in the metaverse can be ille- gally stolen, impersonated, and interoperability issues can be encountered in authentication across virtual worlds. Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  SUMMARY OF EXISTING METAVERSE PROTOTYPES IN DIFFERENT APPLICATIONS ) Identity Theft: If the identity of a user is stolen in the metaverse, his/her avatars, digital assets, social relationships, and even the digital life can be leaked and lost, which can be more severe than that in traditional information systems. For example, hackers can steal users’ personal information (e.g., full names, secret keys of digital assets, and banking details) in Roblox through hacked personal VR glasses, phish- ing email scams, and authentication loopholes to commit fraud and crimes (e.g., steal the victim’s avatar and digital assets) in Roblox. For example, in , the accounts of  users in the Opensea NFT marketplace are hacked due to smart contract ﬂaws and phishing attacks, causing a lost of $. million []. ) Impersonation Attack: An attacker can carry out the impersonation attack by pretending to be another authorized entity to gain access to a service or system in the meta- verse []. For example, hackers can invade the Oculus helmet and exploit the stolen behavioral and biological data gathered by the in-built motion-tracking system to create digital repli- cas of the user and impersonate the victim to facilitate social engineering attacks. The hackers can also create a fake avatar using digital replicas of the victim to deceive, fraud, and even commit a crime against the victim’s friends in the metaverse. Another example is that attackers can exploit Bluetooth imper- sonation threats [] to impersonate trusted endpoints and illegally access metaverse services by inserting rogue wearable devices into the established Bluetooth pairing. ) Avatar Authentication Issue: Compared with real-world identity authentication, the authentication of avatars (e.g., the veriﬁcation of their friends’ avatars) for users in the metaverse can be more challenging through verifying facial features, voice, video footage, and so on. Besides, adversaries can create multiple AI bots (i.e., digital humans), which appear, hear, and behave identical to user’s real avatar, in the virtual world (e.g., Roblox) by imitating user’s appearance, voice, and behaviors []. As a consequence, more additional personal information might be required as evidence to ensure secure avatar authentication, which may also open new privacy breach users/avatars in the metaverse, it is fundamental to ensure fast, efﬁcient, and trusted cross-platform and cross-domain identity authentication, i.e., across various service domains and virtual worlds (built on distinct platforms such as blockchains) []. For example, the trust-free and interoperable asset exchange and avatar transfer between Roblox and Fortnite, as well as among distinct administrative domains for offering different B. Threats to Access Control in Metaverse ) Unauthorized Data Access: Complex metaverse services will generate new types of personal proﬁling data (e.g., biometric information, daily routine, and user habits). To deliver seamless personalized services (e.g., customized avatar in the metaverse, different VSPs in distinct sub-metaverses need to access real-time user/avatar proﬁl- ing activities []. Malicious VSPs may carry out attacks for unauthorized data access to earn beneﬁts. An example is that malicious VSPs may illegally elevate their rights in data access via attacks such as buffer overﬂow and tampering access con- trol lists []. Besides, as such massive personal information is produced and transmitted in real time, it is complicated to decide exactly what personal information to be shared, with whom, under what condition, for what purpose, and when it ) Misuse of User/Avatar Data: In the life-cycle of data services in the metaverse, user/avatar-related data can be dis- closed intentionally by attackers or unintentionally by VSPs to facilitate user proﬁling and targeted advertising activities. Besides, due to the potential non-interoperability of certain sub-metaverses, it is hard to trace the data misuse activities in C. Security Countermeasures to Metaverse Authentication For the metaverse, secure and efﬁcient identity management is the basis for user/avatar interaction and service provisioning. Generally, digital identities can be classiﬁed into the following • Centralized Identity: Centralized identity refers to the digital identity authenticated and managed by a single institution, such as the Gmail account. • Federated Identity []: Federated identity refers to the digital identity managed by multiple institutions or fed- erations. It can reduce the administrative cost in identity authentication for cross-platform and cross-domain oper- ations, and alleviate the cumbersome process of typing personal information repeatedly for users. • Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) []: SSI refers to the digi- tal identity which is fully controlled by individual users. It allows users to autonomously share and associate information (e.g., username, educa- tion information, and career information) in performing cross-domain operations to enable identity interoperabil- Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY environments, Li et al. [] design an innovative key estab- lishment approach by utilizing unique wireless channel char- acteristics based on the positioning of wearable devices. The authors leverage the received signal strength (RSS) trajectories of two moving wearables to construct the secret key by moving or shaking the wearable devices. Rigorous security analysis proves the defense of eavesdropping and experimental results validate its practicability for wearables with short-range com- munications and frequent movements. Apart from the RSS, the channel impulse response (CIR) is another typical unique physical-layer characteristic between communication parties. To secure communications between wearable devices integrated with accelerometers, Sun et al. [] exploit the gait-based biometric cryptography to design a group key gen- eration and distribution scheme for wearable devices based on signed sliding window coding and fuzzy vault. The proposed acceleration-based key generation mechanism takes advantage of the randomness of noise signals imposed on the raw accel- eration signals to produce a group key. Besides, it utilizes the common characteristic of gait signals sampled from distinct parts of the human body for key distribution to other sensors on the same body. Simulations prove that it can pass both the NIST and Dieharder statistical tests. To further reduce system overheads and reduce response delay for resource-limited wearable devices, Chen et al. [] introduce a lightweight and real-time key establishment model with gait regularity hiding functions for wearables by analyz- ing gestures and motions through the integrated accelerometer. In their work, the shared key is established in real time based on user’s motion (e.g., shaking and walking), and a lightweight bit-extraction method is devised based on the value difference of neighboring samples. Simulation results show that the gen- eration rate of shake-to-generate key is . bit/sec and the To protect patients from fatal cyber attacks, Zheng et al. [] propose an electrocardiogram (ECG) signal based key distribu- tion mechanism for wearable and implantable medical devices (WIMDs). In their work, two widely used cryptographic prim- itives, i.e., fuzzy commitment and fuzzy vault, are compared. Experimental results show that the solution built on fuzzy vault achieves a lower acceptable false reject rate (i.e., %) and less energy cost of WIMDs, while the solution built on fuzzy commitment attains a higher false acceptance rate. ) Identity Authentication for Wearable Devices: Identity authentication for wearable devices to guarantee device/user authenticity is also a promising topic in the metaverse. To adapt to wearable devices with extremely low comput- ing/storage capacity, Srinivas et al. [] present a cloud-based mutual authentication model with low system cost for wear- able medical devices to prevent device impersonation in healthcare monitoring systems with password change and smart card revocation functions. Rigorous security analysis and formal security veriﬁcation prove the security of created session key against active and passive attacks. However, the one-time authentication in [] may cause friction such as unauthorized privileges. To resolve this issue, Zhao et al. [] propose a novel continuous authentication model to support seamless device authentication at a low cost. In [], unique Fig. . Comparison of hardware terminals for entering the Web, mobile In the metaverse, centralized identity systems can be prone to SPoF risks and suffer potential leakage risks. Federated identity systems are semi-centralized and the management of identities is controlled by a few institutions or federa- tions, which may also suffer potential centralization risks. The identity systems built on SSIs will be dominant in future metaverse construction []. According to [], identity man- agement schemes in the metaverse should follow the following design principles: (i) scalability to massive users/avatars, (ii) resilience to node damage, and (iii) interoperability across various sub-metaverse during authentication. Fig.  compares the hardware terminals for entering the Web, mobile Internet, the metaverse. As shown in Fig. , in the metaverse, empowered by XR and HCI technologies, wearable devices such as HMD and BCI enable user/avatar interactions and are expected as the major terminal to enter the metaverse []. Besides, the metaverse usually includes various administrative domains and the sub-metaverses can be imple- mented on distinct blockchain platforms []. In the following, we ﬁrst review existing works on the metaverse in terms of key management and identity authentication for wearable devices. Then, we give the literature review in cross-domain identity authentication and access control in the metaverse. devices such as Oculus helmets and HoloLen headsets are anticipated to be the major terminal to enter the metaverse. Key management (including generation, negotiation, distri- bution, update, revocation, and recovery) is essential for wearable devices to establish secure communication, deliver sensory data, receive immersive service, etc. Conventional key management mechanisms are mainly built upon cryp- tographic systems such as Difﬁe-Hellman cryptosystem and public key infrastructure (PKI). These mechanisms usually require strict constraints on available resources (e.g., computa- tion power, memory size, bandwidth, and transmit power) for sensor node operations, which are not applicable for battery- powered wearable devices with compact battery size and limited computational capacity. In the literature, works [], [], [], [] take the intrinsic features of distinct wearable devices (e.g., wireless channel and gait signal) into account in designing efﬁcient key management schemes, which can be beneﬁcial for future metaverse construction. Aimed to bridge the contactless secret key establishment among tiny wearable devices under wireless communication Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  cardiac biometrics are extracted from photoplethysmography (PPG) sensors (embedded in wrist-worn wearables) for user authentication. Experimental results show that their proposed system obtains a high average continuous authentication accu- racy rate of .%. Jan et al. [] design a privacy-aware mutual authentication mechanism for wearable devices, where a hidden Markov model (HMM) is devised to predict privacy risks of patient data leakage. Besides, the security of [] is analyzed using BurrowsAbadiNeedham (BAN) logic. In the metaverse, Bluetooth may play an important role in short-range communications for wearables. Aksu et al. [] study the wearable device identiﬁcation issue using the Bluetooth protocol. In their work, a smart wearable ﬁnger- printing method tailored to Bluetooth is devised using a series of AI algorithms, and real tests on wearables validate its functionality and feasibility. By using two representatives (i.e., Google Nest Learning Thermostat and Nike+ Fuelband Fitness Tracker) as test devices, Arias et al. [] present a real attack using a hardware with particular attack vectors to bypass software authentications and compromise the two devices. Lessons show that it is necessary to secure all update channels and disable the microcontroller’s external reprogrammability and any debug interface for wearable devices. ) Cross-Domain Identity Authentication: The metaverse typically contains various administrative security domains cre- ated by distinct operators/standards. Identity authentication across distinct administrative domains (e.g., VR/AR services run by distinct VSPs) in the metaverse is critical to deliver seamless metaverse services for users/avatars. Traditional cross-domain authentication mechanisms mainly rely on a trusted intermediary and bring heavy overhead in key man- agement. To address this issue, Shen et al. [] employ blockchain technology to design a decentralized and trans- parent cross-domain authentication scheme for industrial IoT devices in different domains (e.g., factories). In their work, a consortium blockchain is employed to establish trust among distinct domains, and identity-based encryption (IBE) is used for device authentication. Besides, an anonymous authentica- tion protocol with identity revocation capability is proposed to remedy the drawback of IBE in terms of identity revocation. In addition, real domain-speciﬁc information are moved to off-chain storage to reduce storage burdens in the blockchain it only identiﬁes certiﬁcates in its domain. In accessing services in other domains such as Kerberos, users’ identities usually could not be recognized or it involves extremely complex operations for cross-domain authentication. By leveraging the distributed consensus of the blockchain, Chen et al. [] propose an efﬁcient cross- domain authentication scheme named XAuth. In their work, to improve the response speed arising from the low through- put of blockchains as well as protect user privacy, the authors design an optimized blockchain approach and privacy preser- vation functions in cross-domain authentication. An anony- mous authentication protocol based on zero-knowledge proof is also devised to ensure privacy protection. An implemented proof-of-concept (PoC) prototype proves its functionality and ) Fine-Grained Access Control and Usage Audit Wearables and UGCs: The massive personally identiﬁable information (PII) handled by wearables can pose a huge risk of unauthorized exposure. To address this issue, Ometov et al. [] propose a novel delegation-of-use mode for wearable devices with privacy guarantees, where owners can lend their personal devices to others for temporary use. However, the associated attacks along with scalability and efﬁciency issues still need more investigations in real-world implementation. The native content creation (e.g., UGCs) produced by to maintain the creativity and sustain- ability of the metaverse. As UGCs inevitably contain sen- sitive and private user information, efﬁcient UGC access control and usage audit schemes should be designed. The following works [], [], [] discuss the UGC access control. Different from conventional access control schemes which enforce a single access policy for a speciﬁc content, Ma et al. [] design a scalable access control scheme to allow multiple levels of access privileges for sharing user-generated media contents (UGMCs) in the cloud. The detailed construc- tion based on scalable CP-ABE mechanism is also presented with formal security proof. However, the above scheme cannot support time-domain UGMC access control. To address this issue, Yang et al. [] propose a time-domain attribute-based access control mechanism with provable security for sharing user-generated video contents (UGVCs) in the cloud. In their mechanism, the allowed time slots for access are embedded into both ciphertexts and keys in CP-ABE, thereby only autho- rized users in speciﬁc time slots can decrypt the UGVCs. Moreover, queries on UGVCs created in previous time slots along with efﬁcient attribute updating and revoking are sup- ported. Nevertheless, the above works overlook that authorized entities may become traitors to illegally redistribute UGCs to the public, i.e., illegal UGC redistribution. To address this real- istic threat, Zhang et al. [] propose a novel secure encrypted UGMC sharing scheme with traitor tracing in the cloud via the proxy re-encryption mechanism (for secure UGMC sharing) and watermarking mechanism (for traitor tracing). The above works mainly focus on the access control of UGCs, while the usage control (i.e., shared UGCs can be only used for intended purposes) is ignored. To bridge this gap, Wang et al. [] propose a novel data processing-as-a- service (DPaaS) mode to complement the current data sharing ecosystem and exploit blockchain technologies for ﬁne-grained data usage policy making on the user’s side, policy execution atop smart contracts, and policy audit on transparent ledgers. Yu et al. [] combine both sensitiveness of UGMC (to be shared) and trustworthiness of user (being granted) to train a tree classiﬁer for ﬁne-grained privacy setting conﬁgura- tions. In their scheme, a deep network is utilized to extract discriminative features and identify privacy-sensitive object classes/events, and users are clustered into social groups for trustworthiness characterization. The metaverse requires users to autonomously control their identity and behavioral data, where users can independently Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO IDENTITY AUTHENTICATION AND ACCESS CONTROL IN METAVERSE manage the UGCs, assets and behavior data generated in dif- ferent sub-metaverses, avoiding the risk of private data being abused. Moreover, under the premise of autonomous autho- rization, users can provide data to other subjects to share the beneﬁts generated by these data. For identity authentication and access control in the metaverse, we have learned that apart from traditional cryptography system design, the fusion of sensory signals (e.g., ECG and PPG) of wearable devices and biometrics (e.g., face and gait) of users can be beneﬁ- cial for efﬁcient key generation and identity authentication in the metaverse. Besides, blockchain can build trust-free digi- tal identities for metaverse users. Moreover, continuous-time dynamic authentication, as well as cross-chain and cross- domain authentication need further investigation under the metaverse environment. A comparison of existing/potential security countermeasures to identity authentication and access control in the metaverse is presented in Table V. IV. THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES TO DATA A. Threats to Data Management in Metaverse The data collected or generated by wearable devices and users/avatars may suffer from threats in terms of data tampering, false data injection, ship/provenance tracing, and intellectual property violation in ) Data Tampering Attack: Integrity features ensure effec- tive checking and detection of any modiﬁcation during data communication among the ternary worlds and various sub- metaverses. Adversaries may modify, remove the raw data throughout the life-cycle of metaverse data services to interfere with the normal activities of users, avatars, or physical entities []. Besides, adversaries may remain undetected by falsifying corresponding log ﬁles or message-digest results to hide their criminal ) False Data Injection Attack: Attackers can inject falsi- ﬁed information such as false messages and wrong instructions to mislead metaverse systems []. For example, AI-aided content creation can help improve user immersiveness in the early stage of the metaverse, and adversaries can inject adver- sary training samples or poisoned gradients during centralized or distributed AI training, respectively, to generate biased AI models. The returned wrong feedbacks or instructions may also threaten the safety of physical equipment and even per- sonal safety. For example, falsiﬁed feedbacks such as excessive voltage can cause damage and malfunction of wearable XR devices. Another example is that the tampered hundredfold magniﬁcations of bodily pain in being shot in Fortnite (a metaverse game) may cause the death of human user. ) Issues in Managing New Types of Metaverse Data: Compared with the current Internet, the metaverse requires new hardware and devices to gather various new types of data Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  digital attributes, making it harder for efﬁcient provenance and ) Threats to Intellectual Property Protection: Different from the actual world, the deﬁnition of intellectual property in the metaverse should be adapted to enforce licensing bound- aries and usage rights for the owners with the evolvement and expanding scale of the metaverse []. Moreover, severe challenges may arise in deﬁning and protecting intellectual property (e.g., avatars, UGCs, and AIGCs) in the new meta- verse ecology, as the geographic boundaries of countries are broken down in the metaverse. For example, there have already been disputes owing to the use of celebrity lookalikes in video games []. Given the commercial value created by avatars, such kinds of disputes may spike exponentially in the future B. Security Countermeasures to Metaverse Data The metaverse is a digital world built on digital copies of the physical environment and avatars’ digital creations. Analogy to the value created by human activities in the real world, dig- ital twins and UGCs as well as avatars’ behaviors (e.g., chat records and browsing records) will produce certain value in the metaverse []. Information security is an important pre- requisite for the development and prosperity of the metaverse. In the following, we discuss the data security in metaverse in terms of data reliability, data quality, and provenance. ) Data Reliability of AIGC, Digital Twin, and Physical Input: In the metaverse, AI such as generative adversarial network (GAN) can help generate high-quality dynamic game scenarios and context images, but also poses security threats such as adversarial and poisoned samples which is hard to detect for humans. In the literature, by taking adversarial sam- ples as part of training data, various efforts have been done to resist adversarial samples via virtual adversarial learning [], adversarial representation learning [], adversarial reinforce- ment learning [], adversarial transfer learning [], and so on, which can be beneﬁcial to resist adversarial threats in the The works [], [] discuss the data reliability of digi- tal twins in the metaverse. Gehrmann and Gunnarsson [] propose a reliable state replication method for digital twin synchronization in industrial applications and identify seven key requirements in security architecture design. Besides, the authors formally deﬁne the synchronization consistency as a metric of the robustness of digital twin synchronization. A PoC implementation using programmable logic controllers (PLCs) validates its effectiveness. However, the trustworthi- ness of data collected from disparate data silos is not studied in []. To address this issue in the metaverse, as shown in Fig. , Liao et al. [] leverage permissioned blockchain technology for trusted digital twin (DT) service transactions between VSPs and service requesters in intelligent transporta- tion systems (ITS). A DT-DPoS (delegated proof of stake) consensus protocol is devised to improve consensus efﬁciency by using distributed DT servers to form the validator commit- tee. Besides, to facilitate users’ customized DT services, an (DTaaS) in intelligent transportation systems (ITS) []. Illustration of blockchain-enabled digital twin (DT)-as-a-service (e.g., eye movement, facial expression, and head movement), which is previously uncollected, to make fully immersive user experiences []. Besides, end-devices in the metaverse (e.g., VR glasses and haptic gloves) can be capable of capturing iris biometrics, ﬁngerprints, or other user-sensitive biometric information. Consequently, it raises new challenges in col- lecting, managing, and storing these enormous user-sensitive metaverse data, as well as the cyber/physical security of For each virtual world (e.g., Horizon and Fortnite), the cor- porations (e.g., Meta and Epic Games) that create and manage it can monetize these private data to streamline and tailor their services or products towards users’ expectations, thereby facil- itating precision marketing for beneﬁts. Other relevant issues to be addressed include who will be the subject of responsibil- ity for collecting, handling, storing, securing, and destroying ) Threats to Data Quality of UGC and Physical Input: In metaverse, selﬁsh users/avatars may contribute low-quality contents under the UGC mode to save their costs, thereby undermining user experience such as unreal experience in the synthesized environment. For example, they may share unaligned and severe non-IID data during the collaborative training process of the content recommendation model the metaverse, causing inaccurate content recommendation. Another example is that uncalibrated wearable sensors can generate inaccurate and even erroneous sensory data to mis- lead the creation of digital twins in the metaverse, causing ) Threats to UGC Ownership and Provenance: Different from the asset registration procedure supervised by the gov- ernment in the real world, the metaverse is an open and fully autonomous space and there exists no centralized authority. Due to the lack of authority, it is hard to trace the owner- ship and provenance of various UGCs produced by massive avatars under different virtual worlds in the metaverse, as well as turn UGCs into protected assets []. Besides, UGCs can be shared in real time within the virtual world or across various virtual worlds and unlimitedly replicated due to the Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY contribution in distributed AI paradigms with consideration of both non-IID effects and collaboration between edge/cloud The works [], [] study the data availability in meta- verse in terms of data synchronization and QoS, respectively. For accurate DT synchronization with its physical coun- terpart, Han et al. [] propose a hierarchical game for dynamic DT synchronization in the metaverse, where end devices collectively gather the status information of physical objects and VSPs decide proper synchronization intensities. In their work, every user selects the optimal VSP in the lower-level evolutionary game, and every VSP makes the optimal synchronization strategy in the upper-level differ- ential game based on users’ strategies and value of DT. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed mechanism attains a higher accumulated revenue for VSP. By leverag- ing covert communication methods, Du et al. [] propose targeted advertising strategy for maximize its payoff in offering high-quality access services for end-users while attaining close-to-one detection error for attackers. In their work, the Vidale-Wolfe advertising model is exploited, and a novel metric meta-immersion is intro- duced to measure users’ feelings in metaverse experience. Simulation results show that the VSP can boost its payoff in comparison with that without advertising. For dynamic metaverse applications, the information freshness (e.g., age of information) can be further considered in data/service ) Secure Data Sharing in XR Environment: Metaverse applications are usually multi-user such as multi-player gam- ing and remote collaboration. Aimed for secure content sharing under multi-user AR applications, Ruth et al. [] study an AR content sharing control mechanism and implement a prototype on HoloLens to allow AR content sharing among remote or co-located users with inbound and outbound control. By rig- orously exploring user’s design space on various AR apps, the authors also deﬁne various mapping manners of AR con- tents into the real world. In WebVR (a VR-based 3D virtual world on HTML canvases), Lee et al. [] identify three new ad fraud threats (i.e., blind spot tracking, gaze and controller cursor-jacking, and abuse of an auxiliary display) in content sharing. User studies on  participants show the success rates range from .% to %. Besides, a defense mechanism named AdCube is presented in [] via visual conﬁnement of 3D ad entities and sandboxing technique. Experimental results show the defense effectiveness of AdCube with a small system ) Provenance of UGC: Data provenance can realize the traceability of historical archives of a piece of UGC, which is essential to evaluate data quality, trace data source, repro- duce data generation process, and conduct audit trail to quickly identify data responsible subjects. In the metaverse, UGC provenance information such as the source, circulation, and intermediate processing information is often stored in disparate data silos (e.g., distinct blockchains), making it difﬁcult to monitor and track in real time. Existing works on IoT data provenance can offer some lessons for UGC provenance design Illustration of (a) 3DoF and (b) 6DoF. 3DoF means an object can rotationally move around the 3D space (i.e., x, y, and z axes), while 6DoF has additional translational movement along those axes (i.e., moving forward/backward, up/down, and left/right). on-demand DT-as-a-service (DTaaS) architecture is presented for fast response to meet diverse DT requirements in ITS. The works [], [] investigate parametric audio render- ing to match and improve the visual experience in 3D virtual worlds. Zimmermann and Liang [] present an interactive audio streaming mechanism with high scalability based on NVEs. Their mechanism combines two concepts: area of interest (AoI) and aural soundscape to make proximal and spatialized audio interactions. Speciﬁcally, AoI limits the dis- tribution area of audio streams as avatars are more likely to interact with others in proximity (the distance is mea- sured by virtual coordinates), and aural soundscape allows distributively audio rendering from different sources to match landscape. Jot et al. [] design an interactive audio engine based on -degree-of-freedom (6DoF) object for parametric audio scene programming (i.e., controllable acoustic orientation, size, orientation, and other properties) in audiovisual metaverse experiences. Fig.  illustrates the dif- ference of 6DoF with conventional 3DoF in using VR devices. Simulation results in [], [] show the feasibility of their ) Data Quality of UGC and Physical Input: Low-quality data input from physical sensors and the UGCs produced by avatars can deteriorate the quality-of-service (QoS) of metaverse services and the QoE of users. Effective quality control mechanisms are important to offer efﬁcient metaverse services and maintain sustainability of the creator economy. Dickinson et al. [] give a user study on  participants in a VR environment and show that user perception of charac- ter believability is inﬂuenced positively by behavioral features while negatively by visual elements. In the literature, game theory and AI methods have been widely utilized to motivate users’ high-quality data contri- bution or service offering, which can offer some lessons in the metaverse design. For example, Xu et al. [] propose a dynamic Stackelberg game to model the interactions between the content provider and edge caching devices (ECDs), where content provider is the game-leader which decides its pay- ment strategy of caching service while each ECD serves as the game-follower to decide its strategy on quality of caching service. A two-tier Q-learning based mechanism is devised in [] to dynamically derive the optimal strategies for each side. In [], Su et al.. propose a deep RL (DRL)-based incentive mechanism to encourage users’ high-quality model Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO DATA MANAGEMENT IN METAVERSE Satchidanandan and Kumar [] design a dynamic water- marking techniques which exploits indelible patterns imprinted in the medium to detect misbehaviors (e.g., signal tamper- ing) of malicious sensors or actuators. Besides, advanced watermarking technique can be utilized for intellectual prop- erty protection and ownership authentication in the metaverse. Liang et al. [] present a blockchain-based cloud ﬁle prove- nance architecture named ProvChain with three stages, i.e., collection, storage, and veriﬁcation of provenance information. ProvChain ensures source tamper resistance, user privacy, and reliability of cloud storage. For multi-hop IoT, Kamal and Tariq [] design a lightweight protocol to enable data prove- nance in wireless communications, where the RSS indicator of the communicating IoT node is exploited to produce the In the metaverse, the life-cycle of UGCs involves the ternary worlds and multiple sub-metaverses, which can be more com- plex than that in traditional IoT. Moreover, smart contracts are anticipated to play an important role in enforcing UGC prove- nance across various metaverse platforms, and more research efforts on its functionality, efﬁciency, and security are required. Besides, the scalability, trust, and efﬁciency (e.g., response delay) are still challenging issues in the provenance of massive UGCs in the large-scale metaverse. For data management in the metaverse, we have learned that the integration of various cutting-edge technologies in the metaverse results in more attack surfaces on UGC, physi- cal inputs, and metaverse outputs. Besides, blockchain offers a potential solution to ensure data reliability in digital twin creation and mitigation. With the ﬂourishing and expanding scale of future metaverse systems, brand new threats emerged speciﬁcally under a metaverse setting can breed, where new defenses for them need to be designed. Essentially, as various emerging technologies are incorporated by the metaverse as its foundation, their intrinsic ﬂaws and vulnerabilities may also be inherited by the metaverse. In addition, the effects of existing threats can be ampliﬁed and become more severe in the meta- verse, driven by the interweaving of various technologies. A comparison of existing/potential security countermeasures to metaverse data management is presented in Table VI. V. PRIVACY THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES A. Privacy Threats in Metaverse lives in the metaverse, user pri- vacy including location privacy, habit, living styles, and so on may be offended during the life-cycle of data services includ- ing data perception, transmission, processing, governance, and ) Pervasive Data Collection: To immersively interact with an avatar, it requires pervasive user proﬁling activities at an unreasonably granular level [] including facial expressions, eye/hand movements, speech and biometric features, and even brain wave patterns. Besides, via advanced XR and HCI tech- nologies, it can facilitate the analysis of physical movements and user attributes and even enable user tracking []. For example, the motion sensors and four built-in cameras in the Oculus helmet help track the head direction and movement, draw our rooms, as well as monitor our positions and envi- ronment in real time with submillimeter accuracy, when we browse the Roblox and interact with other avatars. If this device is hacked by attackers, severe crimes can be committed on the basis of these large-volume of sensitive data. Another example is the attractive virtual ofﬁce (e.g., Horizon Workroom and Microsoft Mesh), which may arise sig- niﬁcant security and privacy risks to employees. On one hand, employee conversations, the emails they send, the URLs they visit, their behaviors, and even the tones of their voices may be monitored by the managers. On the other hand, the immersive workplace may be prone to other security and privacy issues such as intrusions, snooping, and impostors. Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY ) Privacy Leakage in Data Transmission: In metaverse systems, abundant personally identiﬁable information col- lected from wearables (e.g., HMDs) are transferred via wired and wireless communications, which should be prohibited from unauthorized individu- als/services []. Although communications are encrypted and information is conﬁdentially transmitted, adversaries may still access the raw data by eavesdropping on the speciﬁc channel and even track users’ locations via differential attacks [] and advanced inference attacks []. ) Privacy Leakage in Data Processing: In metaverse services, the aggregation and processing of massive data col- lected from human bodies and their surrounding environments are essential for the creation and rendering of avatars and vir- tual environments, in which users’ sensitive information may be leaked []. For example, the aggregation of private data (belonging to different users) to a central storage for train- ing personalized avatar appearance models may offend user privacy and violate existing real-world regulations such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) []. Besides, adversaries may infer users’ privacy (e.g., preferences) by analyzing and linking the published processing results (e.g., synthetic avatars) in various virtual spaces such as Roblox ) Privacy Leakage in Cloud/Edge Storage: The storage of the private and sensitive information (e.g., user proﬁling) of massive users in cloud servers or edge devices may also raise privacy disclosure issues. For example, hackers may deduce users’ privacy information by frequent queries via differential attacks [] and even compromise the cloud/edge storage via distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks []. In , a customer database of the Second Life (a metaverse game) was hacked and the user data was breached including unencrypted usernames and addresses, as well as encrypted payment details ) Rogue or Compromised End Devices: In the metaverse, more wearable sensors will be placed on human bodies and their surroundings to allow avatars to make natural eye con- tact, capture hand gesture, reﬂect facial expression, and so on in real time. A signiﬁcant risk is that these wearable devices can have a completely authentic sense of who you are, how you talk, behave, feel, and express yourself. The use of rogue or compromised wearable end devices (e.g., VR glasses) in the metaverse is becoming an entryway for data breaches and mal- ware invasions, and the problem may be more severe with the popularity of wearable devices for entering the metaverse []. Under the manipulation of rogue or compromised end devices, the avatars in the metaverse may turn into a source of data collection, thereby infringing user privacy. For example, as advanced wearable devices such as Oculus helmets and haptic gloves can track eye movements and hand gestures, hackers can recreate user actions and even sensitive passwords for per- sonal accounts by following the eye and ﬁnger movements in tapping in codes on a virtual keypad. ) Threats to Digital Footprints: As the behavior pattern, preferences, habits, and activities of avatars in the metaverse can reﬂect the real statuses of their physical counterparts, attackers can collect the digital footprints of avatars and exploit the similarity linked to real users to facilitate accurate user pro- ﬁling and even illegal activities []. Besides, metaverse usually offers the third person view with a wider viewing angle of their avatar’s surroundings than that in the real world [], which may infringe on other players’ behavior privacy with- out awareness. For example, an avatar may conduct the virtual stalking/spying attack in Roblox by following your avatar and recording all your digital footprints, e.g., purchasing behaviors, to facilitate social engineering attacks. ) Identity Linkability in Ternary Worlds: As the meta- verse assimilates the reality into itself, the human, physical, and virtual worlds are seamlessly integrated into the meta- verse, causing identity linkability concerns across the ternary worlds []. For example, a malicious player A in Roblox can track another player B by the name appeared above the corresponding avatar of player B and infer his/her posi- tion in the real world. Another example is that hackers may track the position of users via compromised VR headsets or ) Threats to Accountability: XR and HCI devices intrinsi- cally gather more sensitive data such as locations, behavior patterns, and surroundings of users than traditional smart devices. For example, in Pokémon Go (a location-based AR game), players can discover, capture, and battle Pokémon using mobile devices with GPS. The accountability in the metaverse is important to ensure users’ sensitive data are han- dled with privacy compliance. For metaverse service providers, the audit process of the compliance of privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR) for accountability can be clumpy and time-consuming under the centralized service offering architecture. Besides, it is hard for VSPs to ensure the transparency of regulation compliance during the life-cycle of data management [], especially in the new digital ecology of metaverse. ) Threats to Customized Privacy: Similar to existing Internet service platforms, distinct users generally exhibit customized privacy preferences for different services or interaction objects [] under distinct sub-metaverses. For example, a user in Roblox may be more sensitive to monetary trading activities than social activities. Besides, users/avatars may be more sensitive in interacting with strangers than acquaintances, friends, or relatives. However, challenges exist in developing customized privacy preservation policies for personal data management while considering avatars in the metaverse as individual information subjects [], as well as the characteristics of users and sub-metaverses. B. Privacy Countermeasures in Metaverse ) Privacy in Metaverse Games: AR/VR games are the current most popular metaverse application for users. AR/VR games usually contain three steps: the game platform (i) col- lects sensory data from users and their surroundings, (ii) identiﬁes objects according to these contexts, and lastly (iii) performs rendering on game senses for immersiveness. Existing works have demonstrated the security and safety concerns related to metaverse games using case studies [] and qualitative studies [], []. Bono et al. [] offer two case studies (i.e., Second Life and Anarchy Online) and show Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  that a hacker can exploit the features and vulnerabilities of MMO metaverse games to fully compromise and take over players’ devices (e.g., laptops). Lebeck et al. [] carry out a qualitative lab study using Microsoft HoloLen (an AR head- set), whose result shows that players can easily be immersed in AR experiences and treat virtual objects as real, as well as various security, privacy, and safety issues are uncovered. Shang et al. [] identify a novel user location tracking attack in location-based AR games (e.g., Pokémon Go) by solely exploiting the network trafﬁc of the player, and real-world experiments on  volunteers validate that the proposed attack model attains ﬁne-grained geolocation of any player with high accuracy. Besides, three possible mitigation approaches are presented in [] to alleviate attack effects. To prevent potential privacy issues in metaverse games, Laakkonen et al. [] introduce privacy-by-design princi- ples in digital games from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives, where nineteen privacy attributes divided into three levels are accounted for privacy evaluation. In [], Corcoran and Costache distinguish the individual privacy and group privacy in privacy-preserving interactive metaverse game design. The former refers to the purchasing patterns, behavioral traits, communication, image/video data, and loca- tion/space related to an individual, while the latter refers to the privacy associated with a group of individuals (e.g., a social group, an organization, and a nation). ) Privacy-Preserving UGC Sharing and Processing: Existing privacy-preserving schemes for data sharing and processing mainly focus on four ﬁelds: differential privacy (DP), federated learning (FL), cryptographic approaches (e.g., secure multi-party computation (SMC), homomorphic encryp- tion (HE), and zero-knowledge proof (ZKP)), and trusted computing. The following works [], [], [], [] discuss privacy-preserving UGC sharing in the metaverse. To offer privacy-preserving trending topic recommendation services in the metaverse, Wei et al. [] propose a graph- based local DP mechanism, where a compressive sensing indistinguishability method is devised to produce noisy social topics to prevent user-linkage association and protect key- word correlation privacy with high efﬁciency. To enable smart health sensing without violating users’ private data in the metaverse, Zhang et al. [] present a FL-based secure data collaboration framework where wearable sensors peri- odically send local model updates trained on their private sensory data to the server which synthesizes a global abnormal health detection model. To resolve class imbalance concerns of participants under FL, the authors in [] further design a novel local update method based on reinforcement learn- ing (RL) and an adaptive global update method via online regret minimization. To enhance privacy protection in the blockchain-based metaverse, Guan et al. [] utilize ZKP to empower current account-model blockchains (e.g., Ethereum) with privacy preservation functions in terms of hiding sender- recipient linkage, account balances, and transaction amounts. Xu et al. [] identify the co-photo privacy threat in social metaverse that a shared photo may contain not only the indi- vidual privacy but also the privacy of others in photos. Besides, by utilizing SMC and SVM techniques, the authors design a personalized facial recognition method to differentiate photo co-owners without disclosing their privacy in users’ private Privacy-preserving UGC processing in the metaverse has also attracted various attention. Based on Okamoto-Uchiyama HE, Li et al. [] present a veriﬁable privacy-preserving method for data processing result prediction in edge-enabled CPSSs. Besides, batch veriﬁcation is supported for multiple prediction results at one time to reduce communication bur- dens. Wang et al. [] leverage the trusted computing tech- nique to design a privacy-preserving off-chain data processing mechanism, where private UGC datasets are processed in an off-chain trusted enclave and the exchange of processed results and payment are securely executed via the designed ) Conﬁdentiality Protection of UGC and Physical Input: The conﬁdentiality of UGCs (inside the metaverse) along with physical inputs (to the metaverse) should be ensured to prevent private data leakage and sensitive data exposure. The authentication &access control (in Section III-C) and pri- vacy computing technologies (in Section V-B2) are enablers to maintain UGC conﬁdentiality in the metaverse. For conﬁ- dentiality of physical inputs, Raguram et al. [] propose a novel threat named compromising reﬂections, which can automatically reconstruct user typing on virtual keyboards, thereby compromising data conﬁdentiality and user privacy. Experiment results show that compromising reﬂections of a device’s screen (e.g., sunglass reﬂections) are sufﬁcient for automatic and accurate reconstruction with no limitation on the motion of handheld cameras even in challenging scenar- ios such as a bus and even at long distances (e.g., 12m for ) Digital Footprints Protection: In the metaverse, privacy inside avatars’ digital footprints can be classiﬁed into three types []: (i) personal information (e.g., avatar proﬁling), (ii) virtual behaviors, and (iii) interactions or communications between avatars or between avatar and NPC. Avatars’ digital footprints can be tracked via virtual stalking/spying attacks in the metaverse to disclose user’s real identity and other private information, e.g., shopping preferences, location, and even banking details. A potential solution is avatar clone [], which creates multiple virtual clones of the avatar which appear iden- tical to confuse the attackers. Nevertheless, it brings other challenging issues such as managing multiple representations of each user and managing millions of clones roaming around Another potential solution is to disguise by periodically changing avatar’s appearance to confuse attackers, or man- nequin by replacing the avatar with a single clone (e.g., bot) which imitates user’s behavior and teleport user’s true avatar to another location when being tracked. Other pri- vacy preservation mechanisms [] include invisibility, private enclave, lockout. Invisibility indicates the avatar is made to be temporarily invisible in case of suspected stalking. Private enclaves allow certain locations inside the metaverse to be occupied by individuals, which are unobserved by others. In private enclaves, owners have control over who can enter into the enclave by teleporting, thereby offering a maximum level Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY individual data from end devices running on macOS or iOS for privacy-preserving services [] such as lookup hints, Emoji suggestions, QuickType suggestions, and Safari autoplay intent In traditional Internet services, the platform operators (e.g., enterprises) control the user data for commercial purposes. Such a centralized management pattern has intrinsic principal- agent risks, and is more prone to privacy leakage and data abuse. In the metaverse, users (as privacy subjects) need to take back control of their private data. Notably, the PII (including user proﬁling and biometric data) collected and processed in the metaverse can be more granular and unprecedentedly per- vasive to make fully immersive experiences, where the device for acquisition massive user-sensitive data, as well as the trans- mission, storage, processing, access control, and destruction process should be well-protected in the life cycle of private data. For privacy in the metaverse, we have learned that exist- ing privacy threats can be ampliﬁed, and new threats related to digital footprints can emerge. Therefore, users may suffer more privacy exposure and higher leakage impact, and require stricter privacy protection in the metaverse. A comparison of existing/potential security countermeasures to metaverse privacy issues is presented in Table VII. VI. NETWORK-RELATED THREATS AND A. Threats to Metaverse Network security) to the communication networks can also be effective, as the metaverse evolves from the current Internet and incor- porates existing wireless communication technologies. Here, we list some typical threats as below. ) SPoF: In the construction of metaverse systems, the centralized architecture (e.g., cloud-based system) brings con- venience for user/avatar management and cost saving in operations. Nevertheless, it can be prone to the SPoF caused by the damage of physical root servers and DDoS attacks []. Besides, it raises trust and transparency challenges in trust-free exchange of virtual goods, virtual currencies, and digital assets across various virtual worlds in the metaverse. ) DDoS: As the metaverse includes massive tiny wearable devices, adversaries may compromise these metaverse end- devices and make them part of a botnet [] (e.g., Mirai) to conduct DDoS attacks to make network outage and service unavailability by overwhelming the centralized server with giant trafﬁc within short time periods, as depicted in the upper part of Fig. . Besides, owing to the constrained communi- cation pressure and storage space on the blockchain, part of NFT functions may be performed on off-chain systems in prac- tical applications [], where adversaries may launch DDoS attacks to cause service unavailability of the NFT system. multiple faked/stolen identities to gain disproportionately large inﬂuence on metaverse services (e.g., Illustration of personal space in real and virtual worlds. (a) Four types of personal spaces: public area (- cm), social area (- cm), personal area (- cm), and intimate area (within  cm). (b) Meta’s personal boundary function for avatars with default private border of -foot. of privacy. Lockout means certain areas inside the metaverse are temporarily locked out for private use. After the lock expires, the restriction is lifted and other users are allowed users/avatars are featured with personalized privacy demands and service preferences, existing privacy computing tech- nologies (in Section V-B2) should also take their customized privacy/service proﬁles into account enhanced metaverse. Existing works on personalized privacy computing are mainly based on similarity [], randomized response [], personalized FL [], and so on. With the growth of metaverse, more research on new personalized applications and the new ecology in the metaverse. ) Privacy-Enhancing Advances in Industry: In the meta- verse, there have been incidents such as VR groping and VR sexual harassments in Horizon Worlds []. In the real world, people potentially keep an appropriate distance from others to maintain personal spaces when socializing. According to the interpersonal intimacy, psychologist Stanley Hall quantiﬁed and divided four types of personal spaces: public area (-  cm), social area (- cm), personal area (- cm), and intimate area (within  cm), as shown in Fig.  (a). It means that for less familiar people, the more personal space we require. Similarly, each avatar also requires personal space even in the virtual world. Recently, Meta announced the pri- vate boundary function in its metaverse platforms Horizon Venues and Horizon Worlds to avoid groping and harassments, where the default personal border for every avatar is a -foot circle []. As shown in Fig.  (b), avatars need to keep at least  feet (about . m) away from others to maintain private Google has built a Privacy Sandbox on Android apps in  to promote private advertising solutions by curbing the sharing of private information with third parties and removing cross-app identiﬁers (including advertising ID) []. Besides, Google debuts its open-source DP tool named PipelineDP with Python library in  by creating pipelines which aggregate personal data to derive valuable insights in a differ- entially private manner. Apple also utilizes local DP to gather Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL PRIVACY COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE such as the metaverse []. In the metaverse, local situa- tional awareness is essential for monitoring a single security domain and global situational awareness can assist early- warning of large-scale distributed threats targeted at multiple ) Local Situational Awareness: Situational awareness for devices and systems built on XR technology has received increasing attention in the metaverse [], [], []. information in AR headsets, and discuss the potential in apply- ing AR technologies to enhance users’ situational awareness in perception and understanding the surroundings. Apart from AR technology, VR technology can enhance situational aware- ness capacities in various applications. Ju et al. [] carry out realistic and immersive driving simulations, whose ﬁnd- ings validate that acoustic cues can help VR drivers remain alert in emergencies (e.g., accidents) under VR car-driving scenarios. Lv et al. [] present a smart intrusion detection model to detect attack behaviors on 3D VR-based industrial control systems based on support vector machine (SVM). Experimental results on a simulated VR industrial scenario show that its average accuracy can keep above %. However, the proposed model cannot resist unknown/new attack types. To effectively detect unknown/new threats, Vu et al. [] design a representation learning approach for better prediction of unknown attacks, where three regularized autoencoders (AEs) are deployed to learn the latent representation. The effectiveness of their work is evaluated on nine recent IoT datasets. To be further adaptive to wearable devices with extreme size and energy constraints, Zhang et al. [] pro- pose a multi-layered lightweight anomaly detection method by exploiting radio-frequency wireless communications to/from them to identify potentially malicious transactions. In [], RL methods are employed for intrusion detection in small- scale applications such as smart homes. In practical applica- tions, it is usually hard and costly to label massive attack samples. To deal with the challenges of few labeled data and the corresponding over-ﬁtting issues, Zhou et al. [] An illustrative example of Sybil attack and DDoS attack in blockchain consensus, and voting-based service in digital gov- ernance) and even take over the metaverse network, thereby compromising system effectiveness, as shown in the lower part of Fig. . For example, adversaries may be able to out-vote genuine nodes by producing sufﬁcient Sybil identities to refuse to deliver or receive some blocks, thereby effectively blocking other nodes from a blockchain network in the metaverse. B. Situational Awareness in Metaverse Situational awareness is an effective tool for security moni- toring and threat early-warning in large-scale complex systems Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO NETWORK-RELATED THREATS IN METAVERSE combine few-shot learning and Siamese neural network to mit- igate over-ﬁtting and intelligently detect diverse attack types To summarize, existing security measures can be catego- rized into two groups: reactive approaches (aim to counter past known attacks) and proactive approaches (aim to mit- igate future unknown attacks). In general cases, reactive defenses built on timely attack trapping, frequent retraining, and decision veriﬁcation can be more convenient and effec- tive than pure proactive defenses. Besides, proactive defenses can be classiﬁed into two paradigms []: security by design defenses (against white-box attacks) and security by obscu- rity defenses (against black-box attacks). The above defense approaches can provide some lessons to resist unknown/new ) Global Situational Awareness: The above works mainly focus on situational awareness in a local security domain. Global situational awareness can facilitate understanding global security statuses in defending large-scale attacks in the metaverse. Both works [], [] utilize data-driven approaches for global situational awareness in large-scale dis- tributed power grids. In [], Shahsavari et al. propose a multi-class SVM classiﬁer to extract malicious events from collected raw metering data. However, their approach relies on additional expert knowledge for costly event labeling. To resolve this issue, Wu et al. [] further model legitimate users and attackers as an evolutionary game and devise a two-phase RL algorithm to solve the game. Proﬁling of poten- tial attack behaviors is another challenge in the metaverse. Krishnan et al. [] combine digital twin and SDN to build a behavioral monitoring and proﬁling system where security strategies are evaluated on digital twins before being deployed Honeynets consisting of collaborative honeypots offer an alternative solution for building a secure metaverse to defend against large-scale distributed attacks. Zhang et al. [] pro- pose a honeynet-based situational awareness system where each honeypot built on the Docker environment traps attack- ers, monitors their attack behaviors, and exchanges these information with each other coordinated by the honeynet rative situational awareness []. Illustration of SDN-enabled virtual honeynet services for collabo- controller. However, the work [] has a drawback in terms of scalability and programmability in large-scale deployment. Zarca et al. [] further propose SDN-enabled virtual hon- eynet services with higher degree of scalability and ﬂexibility, and the efﬁciency of the proposed approach is validated using real implementations and tests. As shown in Fig. , based on speciﬁc security policies, security virtual network functions (VNFs) (e.g., virtual honeynet, IDS, IPS, and ﬁrewall) can be conﬁgured and instanced on demand reactively or proac- tively, coordinated by the SDN controller. Thereby, appropriate defense mechanisms (including situation monitoring, attack trapping, and security resource allocation) can be provisioned quickly and feasibly to enable self-protection, self-repair, and self-healing. However, the trust issues and resilience of com- promised domain operators in aggregating local situational awareness into the global one require further investigation. For situational awareness in the metaverse, we have learned that AR, AI, honeypot, and SDN technologies can help build situational awareness systems in the metaverse. Besides, global situational awareness can assist monitoring and early- warning of large-scale distributed threats targeted at multiple sub-metaverses. A comparison of existing/potential security countermeasures to network-related threats in the metaverse Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  VII. ECONOMY-RELATED THREATS AND A. Threats to Metaverse Economy Various attacks may threaten the creator economy in the metaverse from the service trust, digital asset ownership, and ) Service Trust Issues in UGC & Virtual Object Trading: In the open metaverse marketplace, avatars may be distrust- ful entities without historical interactions. There exist inherent fraud risks (e.g., repudiation and refusal-to-pay) during UGC and virtual object trading among different stakeholders in the metaverse. Besides, in the construction of virtual objects via digital twin technologies, the metaverse has to guarantee that the produced and deployed digital copies are authentic and trustworthy []. For example, malicious users/avatars may buy UGCs or virtual objects in Roblox and illegally sell the digital duplicates of them to others to earn proﬁts. In addition, adversaries may exploit vulnerabilities in metaverse systems to commit fraud and undermine service trust. An example is that the metaverse project Paraluni based on Binance Smart Chain (BSC) lost over $. million in  due to the reentrancy ) Threats to Digital Asset Ownership: Due to the lack of central authority and the complex circulation and ownership forms (e.g., collective ownership and shared ownership []) in the distributed metaverse system, it poses huge challenges for the generation, pricing, trusted trading, and ownership traceability in the life-cycle of digital assets in the creator economy. Empowered by blockchain technology, the indivis- ible, tamper-proof, and irreplaceable NFT offers a promising solution for asset identiﬁcation and ownership provenance in the metaverse []. However, NFTs also face threats such as ransomware, scams, and phishing attacks. For example, adver- saries may mint the same NFT on multiple blockchains at the same time. Besides, evil actors may cash out their shares after inﬂating the value of NFTs, or they may sell NFTs to gain beneﬁts before minting anything, where these De-Fi scams cause $ million lost in  []. ) Threats to Economic Fairness in Creator Economy: Well-designed incentives [], [] are benign impetuses to promote user participation and open creativity in resource sharing and digital asset trading in the creator economy. The following three adversaries who threaten economic fairness are • Strategic users/avatars may manipulate the digital market in the metaverse to make enormous proﬁts by break- ing the supply and demand status []. For example, in metaverse auctions, strategic avatars may overclaim its bid, instead of its true valuation, to manipulate the auction market and win the auction. • Free-riding users/avatars may unfairly gain revenues and enjoy metaverse services without contributing to the metaverse market [], thereby compromising the sus- tainability of creator economy. For example, a free-riding avatar may submit meaningless local updates in collec- tively training an intelligent 3D navigation model under distributed AI and unfairly enjoy the beneﬁts from the • Collusive users/avatars in the metaverse may collude with each other or with the VSP to perform market manipu- lation and gain economic beneﬁts []. For example, collusive avatars may collude to manipulate the results of metaverse auctions and earn illegal revenues. B. Open and Decentralized Creator Economy Creator economy is an essential component of the meta- verse to maintain its sustainability and promote avatars’ open it should be built on a decentralized architecture to prevent centralization risks, e.g., SPoF, non- transparency, and control by a few entities. Speciﬁcally, the metaverse economy should simultaneously achieve three goals: () make data/assets from different sources mutually iden- tiﬁable, trustworthy, and veriﬁable (see Sects. III and IV); () design suitable incentive mechanisms for data/assets circu- lation to form a benign data sharing and coordination pattern; () allow data subjects, data controller, data processor, and the user have the right to negotiate the rules and mechanisms of data protection and applications. ) Trusted UGC/Asset/Resource Trading: As shown in Fig. , blockchain technologies (e.g., NFT and smart contract) provide a decentralized solution to construct the sustainable creator economy. NFT is the irreplaceable and indivisible token in the blockchain [] and is regarded as the unique tradable digital asset associated with virtual objects (e.g., land parcel and digital drawing). For example, in the game Cryptokitties, players can buy virtual pet cats with unique genetic attributes identiﬁed by NFT and breed them. Besides, smart contracts enable the automatic transaction enforcement and ﬁnancial settlement in trading virtual objects, items, and assets. The works [], [], [] discuss the usage of blockchain technology for virtual economy design. Rehman et al. [] discuss several design principles in cryptocurrency ecosystems including centrality, privacy, price manipulation, insider trading, parallel and shadow economy, governance, usability, and security. Considering the cooper- ation of heterogeneous smart devices, De Biase et al. [] propose a swarm economy model for digital resource shar- ing which incorporates their spontaneous collaboration and dynamic organization in large-scale networks. A blockchain- based transaction model is also developed in [] for trans- parent and immutable currency audit, thereby ensuring trading trust among distrustful devices. However, has drawbacks in terms of non-automatic transaction settle- ment, high computational overhead, and non-supervisability. To address these issues, Liu et al. [] propose a blockchain- based automatic transaction settlement framework, in which a three-layer sharding blockchain architecture is devised for enhanced system scalability. Moreover, the authors in [] devise an encryption scheme with keyword search to uncover criminal transactions and achieve crime traceability, where the supervision right is equally allocated among all partic- ipants. Jiang et al. [] introduce FL-enabled digital twin (DT) edge networks, where access points (APs) serve as edge nodes to help end-user devices build DT models. In [], a directed acyclic graph (DAG) blockchain is employed to securely record both local model updates and global model Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY updates in FL, as well as the resource transactions between from the trust-free blockchain approaches, or reputation management offer a quantiﬁable solution to evaluate the trustworthiness of participants and services with less computation/energy/storage consumption. Das and Islam [] propose dynamic trust models and metrics based on user interactions including direct/indirect from local/recommendation experience) and recent/historical (considering time decay effects). To achieve “trust mous trust and reputation management system in mobile crowdsensing. However, most of the current works on trust or reputation evaluation may rely on the speciﬁc rules to determine trust scores and cannot historical interaction information. To cope with this issue, Jayasinghe et al. [] exploit AI techniques to design an intel- ligent trust model, which classiﬁes various individual trust attributes (e.g., frequency, duration, and cooperativeness) and aggregates them to produce ﬁnal trust values. individual users/avatars without is hard to promote collaboration among Besides, the economic fairness in metaverse markets may be violated by strategic, free-riding, and collusive users/avatars. tions [] and truthful contracts [], can prevent strategic users/avatars from market manipulating. However, participation also violates user’s privacy, e.g., bid in auctions may reveal user’s true valuation on the items. Existing strategy-proof and privacy-preserving auc- tions mainly depend on cryptographic mechanisms (e.g., ZKP [], HE []), DP []), which may bring large system burdens for energy-limited wearable devices or large data utility decrease in practical metaverse applications. A trade-off mechanism between privacy and utility is needed for users/avatars with diverse preferences in the metaverse. Existing schemes to prevent free-riders (who try to enjoy beneﬁts of the good/service without contributing to it) mainly focus on node behavior modeling [], cryptographic mech- anism [], [], and contribution certiﬁcation []. For example, Li et al. [] observe that BitTorrent systems (account for % of the trafﬁc on the Internet) may fail to overcome free-riders if a large number of seeds (who have all pieces of the ﬁle) exist. To bridge this gap, the authors design a ﬂuid model for non-free-riders and free-riders in P2P ﬁle sharing systems (e.g., BitTorrent) to capture and mitigate free- riding effects by designing optimal seed bandwidth allocation strategies. Theoretical analysis shows the existence of Nash equilibrium (NE) in their strategy, and simulation results show its effectiveness in free-riding penalization and cooperation As the economic fairness may conﬂict with other vital met- rics (such as economic efﬁciency and QoE) to some extent, Shin et al. [] introduce two principles in incentive design: (i) strict economic fairness to forbid free-riders; and (ii) adap- tive but non-exploitable newcomer bootstrapping for economic efﬁciency. Based on symmetric key cryptography and pay-it- forward strategy, the authors in [] design a lightweight and easy-to-implement fairness algorithm named T-Chain to prevent free-riders and enforce reciprocity under fully dis- tributed cooperative scenarios such as BitTorrent-like ﬁle sharing. Experiments on BitTorrent validate the efﬁciency of T- Chain in free-riding prevention, fast newcomer bootstrapping, and low efﬁciency loss (e.g., only % additional overhead on bandwidth and storage). To mitigate free-riding attacks, Li et al. [] utilize smart contracts and ZKP to gener- ate proof-of-ad-receiving commitments in blockchain systems with anonymity and conditional linkability guarantees. Ma et al. [] propose a service differentiation framework with free-rider forbidden capabilities, where differentiated services are offered to peers based on their prior contribu- tion levels in service offering. In their work, peers’ competing resource request/distribution interactions are formulated as a dynamic competition game. Theoretical analysis proves its efﬁciency in reaching NE, and numerical examples illustrate its functionality in service differentiation and free-rider pre- vention. As users/avatars in the metaverse may also exhibit free-riding behaviors, the above works can provide lessons for free-rider modeling, detection, and prevention in metaverse Multi-user/avatar collusion prevention is also important for fairness in the creator economy. Existing collusion-resistant mechanisms mainly focus on AI-based collusion behavior detection [], cryptographic approaches [], game the- ory [], and optimization theory [], which can be beneﬁ- cial for collusion defense in metaverse services. Besides, future research efforts are required in designing fair mechanisms with the combination of strategy-proofness, collusion-resistance, free-rider prevention, along with privacy preservation in the In the literature, various works leverage game theory and learning-based methods to improve economic efﬁciency for including iterative double auction for resource pricing in DT construction [], [], DRL-based double Dutch auction for VR service trading [], two-tier Q-learning for secure edge caching services [], optimization theory for resource allocation in virtual education [], and hierarchical game for coded distributed computing services in ) Ownership Traceability of Digital Assets: In the meta- verse, blockchain provides a promising solution to manage the complex asset provenance and ownership tracing in the life-cycle of digital assets by recording the evidence of con- tent/asset originality and involved operations on the public ledgers. As the recorded historical activities on blockchain ledgers are maintained by the majority of entities in the metaverse, it is ensured to be democratic, immutable, trans- parent, auditable, and non-repudiable. Besides, smart contracts offer an intelligent traceability solution by coding the owner- ship management logic into scripts which are run atop the blockchain. Existing works have utilized blockchain tech- nologies for food supply [], cloud storage [], charging pile sharing [], and ride sharing []. In addition to Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO METAVERSE ECONOMY private ownership, there can exist multiple types of owner- ship forms in the metaverse such as collective ownership and shared ownership [], which raise extra challenges in own- ership management of virtual objects and metaverse assets. interest in utilizing NFT for asset identiﬁcation and ownership provenance []. Nevertheless, NFTs also face vulnerabilities such as cross-chain fraud, inﬂation attack, phishing, and ran- somware. An example is that bad actors may concurrently mint the same NFT on multiple blockchains. For creator economy in the metaverse, we have learned that blockchain technology is the key to build the decen- tralized virtual economy ecosystem from virtual currency creation and trusted UGC/asset/resource trading to economic fairness and ownership traceability. Moreover, the interoper- ability, resilience, and efﬁciency issues are prime concerns to construct a sustainable creator economy. A comparison of existing/potential security countermeasures to metaverse economy is presented in Table IX. VIII. THREATS TO PHYSICAL WORLD AND HUMAN SOCIETY AND COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE The threats occurring in the metaverse may also affect the physical world and threaten human society. A. Threats to Physical World and Human Society The metaverse is an extended form of the cyber-physical- social system (CPSS) [], in which physical systems, human society, and cyber systems are interconnected with complex interactions. The threats in virtual worlds also severely affect physical infrastructures, personal safety, and human society. ) Threats to Personal Safety: In the metaverse, hackers can attack wearable devices, XR helmets, and other indoor sensors (e.g., cameras) to obtain the life routine and track the real-time position of users to facilitate burglary, which may threaten their safety []. A report released by the XR Security Initiative (XRSI) shows that an adversary can manipulate a VR device to reset boundaries []. Thereby, a user in metaverse can be poten- tially pushed toward a ﬂight of stairs or misdirected into dangerous physical situations (e.g., a street). Besides, the metaverse can open up new opportunities for misconducts and crimes. In the metaverse, risks of physical trauma may be limited, but users could be mentally scarred. For example, due to the immersive realism of metaverse, hack- ers can suddenly display harmful and scary content (e.g., ghost pictures) in the virtual environment in front of the avatar, which may lead to the death of fright of the corresponding user. Moreover, the lack of laws and regulations can further increase the possibility of criminal or abusive actions. ) Threats to Infrastructure Safety: By snifﬁng the soft- ware or system vulnerabilities in the highly integrated meta- verse, hackers may exploit the compromised devices as entry points [] to invade critical national infrastructures (e.g., power grid systems and high-speed rail systems) via APT ) Social Effects: Although metaverse offers an exciting digital society, severe side effects can also raise in human society such as user addiction [], rumor prevention [], child pornography, biased outcomes, extortion, cyberbullying, cyberstalkers [], and even simulated terrorist camps []. the immersive metaverse can provide future potentials for extremists and terrorists by making it easier to recruit and meet up, offering new ways for training and coordination, and lowering costs for ﬁnding new targets []. Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY Essentially, the immersive training in digital clones of actual buildings can assist terrorists to plan attacks and escape routes. Another example is that the metaverse, in its ultimate form, is fully controlled by AI algorithms (as depicted in the ﬁlm Matrix), in which the code can be the law to rule everything and severe ethical issues such as race/gender bias may arise. In this subsection, we review existing potential solutions to the physical safety in the metaverse from the cyber insurance and cyber-physical interaction aspects. Insurance-Based Solutions: Cyber offers a ﬁnancial instrument for risk mitigation of critical infrastructures in cyberthreats. To resolve the high premium stipulation in traditional insurance offered by insurance com- panies, Lau et al. [] propose the coalitional insurance in power systems where the coalitional premium is computed by considering loss distributions, vulnerabilities, and bud- get compliance in an insurance coalition. Feng et al. [] integrate cyber insurance into blockchain services to prevent potential damages under attacks, where a sequential game theoretical framework is developed to model the interactions among users, blockchain platform, and cyber-insurer. The user’s optimal demand of blockchain service, blockchain plat- form’s optimal pricing strategy, and cyber-insurer’s optimal investment strategy are analytically derived by solving the joint market equilibrium problem. However, when applying to the metaverse, the scalable and dynamic insurance coalition for- mation along with fair premium design under diverse cyber threats (e.g., anti-forensics) require further investigation. ) CPSS-Based Solutions: Apart from the single cyber per- spective, existing CPSS-based solutions afford lessons for cyberthreat defense and physical safety protection in the meta- verse from the perspective of interactions between cyber and physical worlds. Vellaithurai et al. [] introduce cyber- physical security indices for security measurement of power grid infrastructures. The cyber probes (e.g., IDS) are deployed on host systems to proﬁle system activities, where the gener- ated logs along with the topology information are to build stochastic Bayesian models using belief propagation algo- rithms. To resolve the issues (e.g., low-level abstraction) in task-based programming paradigm, Tariq et al. [] propose a service-oriented paradigm with QoS-aware operation and resource-aware deployment for better support of disruption- free incremental system implementation and reconﬁguration. Different from CPSSs, metaverse is an immersive and hyper spatiotemporal virtual space with a sustainable economy ecosystem, which adds extra challenges in solution migration. In this subsection, we review existing works on soci- ety management in the metaverse from the following two ) Misinformation Spreading Mitigation: The extremely rapid information spreading (e.g., gossip) in the metaverse makes the so-called “butterﬂy effect” more challenging in social governance and public safety in the real world. As an attempt to address this issue, Zhu et al. [] propose to minimize the misinformation inﬂuence in online social networks (OSNs) by dynamically selecting a series of nodes to be blocked from the OSN. However, it only works in tra- ditional static OSNs and it is challenging to be applied in the fully interactive metaverse with a huge and time-varying social ) Human Safety and Cyber Syndromes: The full immer- siveness in metaverse can also raise immersion concerns, e.g., occlusion and chaperone attack, as well as cybersick- ness []. Casey et al. [] investigate a new attack named human joystick attack in immersive VR systems such as Oculus Rift and HTC Vive. In their work, adversaries can modify VR environmental factors to deceive, disorient, and control immersed human players and move them to other phys- ical locations without consciousness. Valluripally et al. [] present a novel cybersickness mitigation method and sev- eral design principles in social VR learning scenarios via threat quantiﬁcation and attack-fault tree model construction. However, the ethical issues and adaptations to different attack- defense strategies are not considered in their work, which is an important factor for future metaverse construction. Besides, more research efforts are required on the mitigation of other immersion risks to human body and human society. ) Society Acceptance Advances in Industry: To enforce age- appropriate interactions within its platforms, Meta has enhanced its age certiﬁcation mechanism with GDPR-compliance, where a tool named Transfer Your Information (TYI) is developed in  []. In TYI, users are allowed to retract their personal information from Meta whenever they intend. For physical safety and social effect in the metaverse, we have learned that existing cyber-insurance and CPSS based approaches can offer some insights for protecting physical devices. More related technological and sociological efforts in this ﬁeld considering the characteristics of metaverse are required. A comparison of existing/potential security counter- measures to physical safety and social effect in the metaverse IX. GOVERNANCE-RELATED THREATS AND demands and poses huge regulation challenges to metaverse A. Threats to Metaverse Governance In analogy to the social norms and regulations in the real world, the interactions among avatars (e.g., content creation, social activities, and virtual economy) in the metaverse should align with the digital norms and regulations to ensure com- pliance []. In the supervision and governance process of metaverse, the following threats may deteriorate system ) New Laws & Regulations for Virtual Crimes: Essentially, it is difﬁcult to decide whether a virtual crime is the same Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL THREATS IN METAVERSE as a real one. Thereby, it is hard to directly apply the laws and regulations in real life to enforce penalization for crimi- nal actions [] such as abusive language, virtual harassment, virtual stalking/spying, and so on. For example, if an avatar is verbally abusive in the metaverse, it can be easily regarded as verbal abuse either in virtual or real worlds. However, if an avatar attempts to virtually stalk or harass another user’s avatar in the metaverse, the deﬁnitions of these crimes may be adapted from the real ones, as well as the appropriate punish- ments, which should be reconsidered for metaverse lawmakers ) Misbehaving Regulators: Regulators may misbehave and cause system paralysis, and their authorities also need super- vision. Dynamic and effective punishment/reward mechanisms should be enforced for misbehaving/honest regulators, respec- tively. To ensure sustainability, punishment and reward rules should be maintained by the majority of avatars in a decen- tralized and democratic manner []. Automatic regulations implemented by smart contracts without reliance on trusted intermediaries may be a promising solution. However, it also raises new issues such as information disclosure, mishandled exceptions, and susceptibility to short address attacks and ) Threats to Collaborative Governance: To avoid the con- centration of regulation rights, collaborative governance under hierarchical or ﬂat mode is more suitable for large-scale meta- verse maintenance []. Nevertheless, collusive regulators may undermine the metaverse system even under collaborative governance scenarios. For example, they can collude to make a certain regulator partitioned from the network via wormhole ) Threats to Digital Forensics: Digital forensics in the metaverse means the virtual reconstruction of cybercrimes by identifying, extracting, fusing, and analyzing evidences obtained from both real and virtual worlds []. Nevertheless, due to the high dynamics and interoperability issues of various virtual worlds, it is challenging for efﬁcient forensics investi- gation including entity-behavior association, identiﬁcation, and tracing among anonymous users/avatars with diverse behav- ior patterns in the metaverse. In addition, due to the blurred boundary between real and virtual worlds, the metaverse can make us confused to distinguish between the true and false. For example, bad actors may produce fake news, faces, audios, and videos via AI algorithms to mislead the public, just like B. Digital Governance in Metaverse Apart from the laws or regulations (i.e., “hard law”), the “soft law” is also signiﬁcant to adjust social relations and regulate user’s behaviors in public metaverse governance. The soft law refers to legal norms including autonomy and self-discipline norms and advocacy rules created by various organizations. Almeida et al. [] highlight three principles in the digital governance of content moderation ecosystems: (i) open, transparent, and consensus-driven, (ii) respect human rights, and (iii) publicly accountable. Here, we review existing potential solutions to metaverse governance from the following ) AI Governance: With the pervasive fusion of percep- tion, computing, and actuation, AI will play a leading role to allow digital self-governance of individuals and society in the metaverse in a fully automatic manner. AI approaches can be employed for detecting misbehaving entities and abnor- mal or Sybil accounts in the metaverse. He et al. [] exploit a multi-factor attention-enhanced LSTM model dynamically reveal suspicious signals of malicious accounts in online dating applications by mining the user-generated textual information and the interplay of accounts’ temporal-spatial activities. Experiments performed on the real-world dataset demonstrate its effectiveness in detection accuracy. However, as the work [] mainly focuses on AI-based malicious account detection, the association of massive avatar- activity-cluster needs further investigations. Besides, the out- comes of AI governance algorithms can be biased and unfair (e.g., race bias), thereby arising ethical concerns. Gasser and Almeida [] propose a three-layer AI governance model from the sociological perspective, where the bottom technical layer allows the data governance and algorithm account- ability; the middle ethical layer guides decision-making and Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY data processing via ethical criteria and norms; and the top social and legal layer addresses the allocation of responsi- bilities in regulation. Zambonelli et al. [] investigate the potential risks including interpretability, trust, autocracy, and ethic issues in delegating the governance of human activi- ties and society to the algorithmic engines in the metaverse. the concrete governance protocols and algo- rithms with ethic-compliance (e.g., how to deﬁne a malicious behavior/avatar) require more research efforts. To summarize, both technological and sociological insights are required to build an AI-governed future metaverse. ) Decentralized Governance: For governance in the large- scale metaverse maintenance, centralized regulatory can face multiple technical and standard obstacles and difﬁculty in the compatibility of transnational regulations. Collaborative governance can avoid concentration of regulation rights and promote democracy for avatars. Blockchain technologies offer potential decentralized solutions for collaborative governance in the metaverse, where smart contracts offer a straightfor- ward approach for decentralized governance in an automatic manner. Bai et al. [] present a blockchain-based decen- tralized framework in digital city governance to encourage users’ active engagement and witness in all administrative processes. In their approach, a veriﬁer group is dynamically selected from digital citizens for transaction veriﬁcation in the hybrid blockchain. A private-prior peer prediction mecha- nism is devised for collusion prevention among veriﬁers, and a Stackelberg game theoretical approach is designed to motivate Based on SDN, Huang et al. [] design a decentralized data lifecycle governance architecture, where UGC owners can implement customized governance rules for data usage to VSPs, aiming to promote an open environment to sat- isfy users’ diverse requirements. To further defend against opportunistic attackers in market manipulation, Li et al. [] study a Dirichlet-based probabilistic detection model to detect compromised local agents in decentralized power grid control systems by evaluating their reputation levels using historical operating observations. The implementation of AI gover- nance under decentralized architectures is a future trend for metaverse governance. Besides, tailored blockchain solutions to metaverse governance are required including metaverse- speciﬁc consensus protocols, new on/off-chain data storage mechanisms, law-compliant regulated blockchain, etc. ) Trusted Digital Forensics: Digital forensics is an enabler for accountability in the metaverse under disputes, which has been widely investigated in images and videos. For example, Swaminathan et al. [] develop a general forensic mecha- nism for digital camera images, according to the observation that in-camera and post-camera image processing leaves a series of distinct ﬁngerprint traces on the digital camera image. The estimated post-camera ﬁngerprints can be employed to validate image authenticity (i.e., whether a speciﬁc digi- tal image is from a speciﬁc scanner, camera, or computer graphics program). However, the use of anti-forensics makes trusted digital forensics challenging. To address this issue, Stamm et al. [] propose an automatic video frame addi- tion or deletion forensics method with anti-forensics detection, according to the observation that a modiﬁed video’s motion vectors (i.e., ﬁngerprint) can be imposed in the anti-forensics An obstacle of digital forensics in the metaverse lies in trustworthiness and labor cost especially for cross-platform operations. Blockchain can offer a decentralized solution to establish trust and enhance automation in multi-party cross- platform digital forensics. For example, Li et al. [] utilize blockchain to design a decentralized forensics method, where customized cryptography enables ﬁne-grained forensics data access control and smart contracts enforce auditable foren- sics execution. In the metaverse, smart contracts can enforce automated forensics procedure among multiple entities and platforms with improved convenience and mitigated cost, which still require more research efforts. Digital forensics can also be utilized for accountability of privacy violations. Zou et al. [] propose a privacy leakage forensics scheme with taint analysis and RAM mirroring to obtain digital evidences without touching user’s privacy data in a simulated virtual environment. More research efforts are required in terms of resilience, collaboration, QoS enhance- ment, and privacy preservation in the implementation of digital forensics for metaverse applications. For digital governance in the metaverse, we have learned that AI-enabled governance and decentralized governance are two trends for future metaverse regulation. Moreover, trusted digital forensics offers a promising tool to regulate the meta- verse. Besides, it is important to leverage AI and blockchain technologies to promote the self-governance capabilities of metaverse communities, where each community forms an autonomous code of conduct and users can report the vio- lation behavior according to the terms. More research efforts are required from both technological and sociological perspec- tives. Due to the intrinsic characteristics (e.g., interoperability, decentralization, scalability, and heterogeneity) of the meta- verse, a series of critical challenges may arise in directly applying existing security countermeasures into the meta- verse. Advanced security solutions tailored to the metaverse setting are needed. A comparison of existing/potential secu- rity countermeasures to metaverse governance is presented in In this section, we discuss several future research directions in the metaverse from the following aspects. A. Endogenous Security Empowered Metaverse Existing commercial metaverse systems mainly depend on the brought-in security such as frequent security patch upgrades after the system deployment. Although security upgrades can enhance system security to an extent, the pas- sive defense mechanisms built on security patching strategies inevitably result in the curse of being continuously broken. With the continuity of ubiquitous cyber-physical attack sur- faces in the metaverse, current bring-in security defenses Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO METAVERSE GOVERNANCE can be fragile and costly in practical use, like the sword of Damocles hanging overhead. Endogenous security theory offers a promising solution for provisioning built-in security or called secure by design mechanisms with self-protection, self-evolution, and autoimmunity capabilities [], which takes security and privacy factors into account before the system design. Thereby, the future metaverse can resist the ever-increasing known/unknown security vulnerabilities and privacy threats. An example of endogenous security is the quantum key distribution (QKD) [], which utilizes channel- based secret keys to resolve information disclosure in wireless transmissions via quantum entanglement properties. Besides, quantum-resistant cryptography (QRC) for quantum secure metaverse applications is another promising research direction. B. Cloud-Edge-End Orchestrated Secure Metaverse Unlike the conventional 2D Internet, the metaverse gathers massive multi-sensory multimodal information from the real world to provide users with fully immersive 3D experiences. In the metaverse, different users/services have distinct QoE/QoS requirements, which incurs huge difﬁculty for the metaverse network to simultaneously offer these holographic services for massive users/avatars. For instance, VR usually requires down- link transmission and caching capabilities, AR mainly focuses on uplink transmission and computing capabilities, while the tactile Internet generally requires ultra-reliable low-latency communications []. The orchestration of cloud-edge-end computing offers a potential solution by collaboratively and dynamically sharing computation, communication, and stor- age resources among various entities [], thereby enhancing the QoE for users/avatars and QoS for metaverse services, as shown in Fig. . Besides, cloud-edge-end computing can assist edge intelligence and user privacy protection by aggre- gating and processing users’ private data at edge devices (e.g., home gateways) via federated edge learning []. In addition, by analyzing the metaverse system as a whole, the cooper- ation among various sub-metaverses is essential to facilitate Illustration of cloud-edge-end computing in metaverse service seamless security provision and privacy protection and requires further investigation. An attractive case is to dynamically allo- cate spatiotemporal security resources (e.g., ﬁrewall, IDS, and IPS) among heterogeneous sub-metaverses (consisting of var- ious edge/cloud servers) in an on-demand manner. Future works to be investigated include the design of speciﬁc edge- edge, edge-cloud, and edge-end collaboration mechanisms in C. Cross-Chain Interoperable and Regulatory Metaverse By getting rid of trusted third parties, blockchain is recog- nized as the underlying technology to build the future trust-free economy ecosystem in the metaverse. However, distinct sub- metaverses may deploy services on heterogeneous blockchains (e.g., using different transaction formats, block structures, and consensus protocols) to meet QoS requirements, resulting in severe interoperability concerns. As shown in Fig. , efﬁ- cient cross-chain authentication and governance are essential Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY technology design, other possible solutions include new archi- tecture design, new green edge-cloud computing design, new energy-efﬁcient consensus protocol design, etc., to support green networking and computing in the metaverse. E. Content-Centric and Human-Centric Metaverse In the future metaverse, a surge of UGC is expected to be created, requested, and delivered across various sub- metaverses. Existing IP-based content transmissions can face critical challenges in securing UGC dissemination to mas- sive heterogeneous end devices over the large-scale meta- verse across virtual worlds. Content-centric networking (CCN) stands for a paradigm shift of current Internet architecture. In contrast to current IP-based and host-oriented Internet archi- tecture, contents are addressed and routed directly by their naming information in CCN instead of IP addresses. In CCN- based metaverse, the UGC consumer can request the desired UGC object by sending an interest message to any CCN node that hosts the matched UGC. Besides, CCN embodies a secu- rity model which explicitly ensures the security of individual content pieces instead of securing the “pipe” or the connection. Therefore, the deployment of CCN can offer a more ﬂexi- ble, scalable, and secure network in the metaverse. However, CCN also brings new security concerns in the metaverse and one of them is content poisoning, in which adversaries can contaminate the cache space of metaverse nodes by injecting poisoned UGCs and further cause the delay and even fail- ure in retrieving valid UGCs via ﬂooding attacks. In addition, the design of metaverse should be human-centric. For exam- ple, users/avatars’ personalized privacy preferences should be ensured in developing privacy-preserving approaches in In this paper, we have presented an in-depth survey of the fundamentals, security, and privacy of metaverse. Speciﬁcally, we have introduced a novel distributed metaverse architecture and discussed its key characteristics, enabling technologies, and modern prototypes. Afterward, vacy threats, as well as the critical challenges in security defenses and privacy preservation, have been investigated under the distributed metaverse architecture. Furthermore, we have reviewed the existing/potential solutions in designing tai- lored security and privacy countermeasures for the metaverse. We expect that this survey can shed light on the security and privacy provision in metaverse applications, and inspire more pioneering research in this emerging area. [] J. Sanchez, “Second life: An interactive qualitative analysis,” in Proc. Soc. Inf. Technol. Teach. Educ. Int. Conf., Mar. , pp. –. [] J. D. N. Dionisio, W. G. Burns, III, and R. Gilbert, “3D virtual worlds and the metaverse: Current status and future possibilities,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. , no. , pp. –, Jul. . [] A. Bruun and M. L. Stentoft, “Lifelogging in the wild: Participant experiences of using lifelogging as a research tool,” in Proc. IFIP Conf. Human Comput. Interact., Aug. , pp. –. [] H. Ning et al., “A survey on metaverse: the state-of-the-art, technolo- gies, applications, and challenges,” , arXiv:.. Illustration of cross-chain services among three sub-metaverses which are built on three different blockchains. A relay chain is established to support cross-chain transactions [], where the relay chain synchronizes the information of source blockchain A to allow destination blockchains B and C to verify the correctness of transactions on source blockchain A. to ensure the security and legitimacy of digital asset-related activities (e.g., asset trading) across different sub-metaverses built on heterogeneous blockchains. Current cross-chain mech- anisms mainly focus on digital asset transfer and rely on the notary scheme, hash-locking, relay chain, and sidechain (details can refer to []), and few of them consider cross- chain authentication and governance in the metaverse. The implementation, efﬁciency, and security of identity authentica- tion across various domains and blockchains in the metaverse need to be further investigated. Moreover, novel decentral- ized, hierarchical, and penetrating cross-chain governance mechanisms need further research efforts in the metaverse. Besides, efﬁcient metaverse-speciﬁc consensus mechanisms, redesigned block structures, as well as well-designed user incentives are required for distinct metaverse applications. To summarize, open challenges include application-speciﬁc gov- ernance rule design, programmable and scalable cross-chain governance architecture design, on-chain entity identiﬁcation and risk assessment, dynamic and collaborative cross-chain D. Energy-Efﬁcient and Green Metaverse In the metaverse, on one hand, the wearable XR devices may be resource-constrained and their communication/computation capacities can be highly heterogeneous. On the other hand, the metaverse can be always resource hungry and the computa- tional power demanded in the metaverse will continue to rise, causing increasing environmental concerns (e.g., greenhouse gas emission). The future metaverse design should be energy- efﬁcient and green to attain sustainability. Users/avatars’ cooperation can offer a possible solution for green meta- verse in terms of UGC/AIGC dissemination, cooperative networking, and cooperative computation. For example, users’ social/locational cooperation can be beneﬁcial to create and distribute high-quality UGC games via the formation of cooperative social groups. Besides, the collaboration among heterogeneous metaverse devices with temporal and spatial correlations can be leveraged to design energy-efﬁcient con- sensus protocols [] tailored to resource-limited metaverse environments. Apart from user cooperation and new green Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  [] D. Grider and M. Maximo. “The metaverse: Web3. virtual cloud economies.” Accessed: Nov. , . [Online]. Available: https:/ /grayscale.com/wp-content/uploads///Grayscale_Metaverse_ [] L.-H. Lee et al., “All one needs to know about metaverse: A complete survey on technological singularity, virtual ecosystem, and research agenda,” , arXiv:.. [] Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, and Z. Zheng, “Fusing blockchain and AI with metaverse: A Survey,” IEEE Open J. Comput. Soc., vol. , pp. –, . [] H. Duan, J. Li, S. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Wu, and W. Cai, “Metaverse for social good: A university campus prototype,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia (MM), Oct. , pp. –. [] W. Y. B. Lim et al., “Realizing the metaverse with edge intelligence: A match made in heaven,” IEEE Wireless Commun., early Access, , [] “Rebrands as Meta to stress ’metaverse’ plan.” Facebook Inc. Accessed: Oct. , . [Online]. Available: https://machinaresearch. com/news/press-release-global-internet-of-things-market-to-grow-to- -billion-devices-generating-usd3-trillion-revenue-in-/ [] R. Leenes, “Privacy in the metaverse: Regulating a complex social con- struct in a virtual world,” in Proc. Future Identity Inf. Soc., Jul. , [] B. Falchuk, S. Loeb, and R. Neff, “The social metaverse: Battle for privacy,” IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jun. . [] J. Shang, S. Chen, J. Wu, and S. Yin, “ARSpy: Breaking location-based multi-player augmented reality application for user location tracking,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Feb. . [] P. Hu, H. Li, H. Fu, D. Cansever, and P. Mohapatra, “Dynamic defense strategy against advanced persistent threat with insiders,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), , pp. –. [] K. J. Nevelsteen, “Virtual world, deﬁned from a technological perspec- tive and applied to video games, mixed reality, and the metaverse,” Comput. Animat. Virtual Worlds, vol. , no. , pp. –, . [] C. T. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, D. N. Nguyen, and E. Dutkiewicz, “Metachain: A novel blockchain-based framework for metaverse appli- cations,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Spring), , [] T. Huynh-The, Q.-V. Pham, X.-Q. Pham, T. T. Nguyen, Z. Han, and D.-S. Kim, “Artiﬁcial intelligence for the metaverse: A survey,” , [] S.-M. Park and Y.-G. Kim, “A metaverse: Taxonomy, compo- nents, applications, and open challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. , [] M. Xu et al., “A full dive into realizing the edge-enabled metaverse: Visions, enabling technologies,and challenges,” , [] M. Bourlakis, S. Papagiannidis, and F. Li, “Retail spatial evolution: to metaverse retailing,” Electron. Paving the way from traditional Commer. Res., vol. , nos. –, pp. –, Jun. . [] J. Díaz, C. Andrés, D. Saldaa, C. Alberto, and R. Avila, “Virtual world as a resource for hybrid education,” Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn., vol. , no. , pp. –, . [] L. Lee et al., “When creators meet computational arts,” , arXiv:.. [] “ISO/IEC  (MPEG-V) standards.” Accessed: Sep. , . [Online]. Available: https://mpeg.chiariglione.org/standards/mpeg-v [] “IEEE  standards.” Accessed: Dec. , . [Online]. Available: https://sagroups.ieee.org// [] L. Heller and L. Goodman, “What do avatars want now? posthuman embodiment and the technological sublime,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Virtual Syst. Multimedia (VSMM), Oct. , pp. –. [] A. C. S. Genay, A. Lecuyer, and M. Hachet, “Being an avatar “for real”: A survey on virtual embodiment in augmented reality,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics, early access, Jul. , , doi: . [] C. Kai, H. Zhou, Y. Yi, and W. Huang, “Collaborative cloud-edge- end task ofﬂoading in mobile-edge computing networks with limited communication capability,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. , [] S. Kumar et al., “Second life and the new generation of virtual worlds,” Computer, vol. , no. , pp. –, Sept. . [] U. Jayasinghe, G. M. Lee, T.-W. Um, and Q. Shi, “Machine learning based trust computational model for IoT services,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jan.-Mar. . [] J. Han, J. Yun, J. Jang, and K.-R. Park, “User-friendly home automation based on 3D virtual world,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. , no. , pp. –, Aug. . [] M. Sugimoto, “Extended reality (XR:VR/AR/MR), 3D printing, holog- raphy, A.I., radiomics, and online VR Tele-medicine for precision surgery,” in Surgery and Operating Room Innovation. Singapore: Springer, Nov. , pp. –. [] C. Jaynes, W. B. Seales, K. L. Calvert, Z. Fei, and J. Grifﬁoen, “The metaverse: A networked collection of inexpensive, self-conﬁguring, immersive environments,” in Proc. Workshop Virtual Environ. (EGVE), [] Y. Wu, K. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Digital twin networks: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Sep. . [] H. Du, D. Niyato, J. Kang, D. I. Kim, and C. Miao, “Optimal tar- geted advertising strategy for secure wireless edge metaverse,” , [] Y. Wang, Z. Su, J. Ni, N. Zhang, and X. Shen, “Blockchain-empowered space-air-ground integrated networks: Opportunities, challenges, and solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] E. H.-K. Wu, C.-S. Chen, T.-K. Yeh, and S.-C. Yeh, “Interactive med- ical VR streaming service based on software-deﬁned network: Design and implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. Taiwan (ICCE-Taiwan), Sep. , pp. –. [] S. Vural, D. Wei, and K. Moessner, “Survey of experimental evalu- ation studies for wireless mesh network deployments in urban areas towards ubiquitous Internet,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. , no. , pp. –, 1st Quart., . [] Q. Wang, R. Li, Q. Wang, and S. Chen, “Non-fungible token (NFT): Overview, evaluation, opportunities and challenges,” , [] J. Han, J. Heo, and E. You, “Analysis of metaverse platform as a new play culture: Focusing on Roblox and ZEPETO,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Human-Centered Artif. Intell., Oct. , pp. –. [] V. Kasapakis and D. Gavalas, “User-generated content sive games,” ACM Comput. Entertainment, vol. , no. , pp. –, [] “Meet the MetaHuman.” Accessed: Jan. , . [Online]. Available: https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/digital-humans [] A. Alwarafy, K. A. Al-Thelaya, M. Abdallah, J. Schneider, and M. Hamdi, “A survey on security and privacy issues in edge-computing- assisted Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , [] K. Tange, M. De Donno, X. Fafoutis, and N. Dragoni, “A systematic survey of industrial Internet of Things security: Requirements and fog computing opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. , no. , pp. –, 4th Quart., . [] “NFT investors lose $.7m in OpenSea phishing attack.” Accessed: Mar. , . [Online]. Available: https://threatpost.com/nft-investors- lose-–7m-in-opensea-phishing-attack// [] D. Antonioli, N. O. Tippenhauer, and K. Rasmussen, “BIAS: Bluetooth impersonation attacks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), [] M. Xu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, C. Miao, and D. I. Kim, “Wireless edge-empowered metaverse: A learning-based incentive mechanism for virtual reality,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), , [] J. Yu, Z. Kuang, B. Zhang, W. Zhang, D. Lin, and J. Fan, “Leveraging content sensitiveness and user trustworthiness to recommend ﬁne- grained privacy settings for social image sharing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , no. , pp. –, May . [] J. Jensen and M. G. Jaatun, “Federated identity management - we built it; why won’t they come?” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. , no. , [] E. Samir, H. Wu, M. Azab, C. S. Xin, and Q. Zhang, “DT-SSIM: A decentralized trustworthy self-sovereign identity management frame- work,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] M. De Ree, G. Mantas, A. Radwan, S. Mumtaz, J. Rodriguez, and I. E. Otung, “Key management small cells: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. , pp. –, [] Z. Li, Q. Pei, I. Markwood, Y. Liu, and H. Zhu, “Secret key estab- lishment via RSS trajectory matching between wearable devices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , no. , pp. –, Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY [] F. Sun, W. Zang, H. Huang, I. Farkhatdinov, and Y. Li, “Accelerometer- based key generation and distribution method for wearable IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] Z. Chen, W. Ren, Y. Ren, and K.-K. R. Choo, “LiReK: A lightweight and real-time key establishment scheme for wearable embedded devices by gestures or motions,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. , [] G. Zheng et al., “A critical analysis of ECG-based key distribution for securing wearable and implantable medical devices,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Feb. . [] J. Srinivas, A. K. Das, N. Kumar, and J. J. Rodrigues, “Cloud centric authentication for wearable healthcare monitoring system,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Sep./Oct. . [] T. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Cheng, and J. Yu, “Trueheart: Continuous authentication on wrist-worn wearables using PPG-based biometrics,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), [] M. A. Jan et al., “Lightweight mutual authentication and privacy- preservation scheme for intelligent wearable devices in industrial-CPS,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. , no. , pp. –, Aug. . [] H. Aksu, A. S. Uluagac, and E. S. Bentley, “Identiﬁcation of wearable devices with Bluetooth,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. , no. , [] O. Arias, J. Wurm, K. Hoang, and Y. Jin, “Privacy and security in Internet of Things and wearable devices,” IEEE Trans. Multi-Scale Comput. Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, Apr.-Jun. . [] M. Shen et al., “Blockchain-assisted secure device authentication for cross-domain industrial IoT,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. , [] J. Chen, Z. Zhan, K. He, R. Du, D. Wang, and F. Liu, “XAuth: Efﬁcient privacy-preserving cross-domain authentication,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., early access, Jun. , , doi: . [] K. Yang, Z. Liu, X. Jia, and X. Shen, “Time-domain attribute-based access control for cloud-based video content sharing: A cryptographic approach,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. , no. , pp. –, [] L. Y. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Weng, C. Wang, Z. Shan, and K. Ren, “You can access but you cannot leak: Defending against illegal content redistribution in encrypted cloud media center,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Nov.-Dec. . [] Y. Wang et al., “SPDS: A secure and auditable private data shar- ing scheme for smart grid based on blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. , no. , pp. –, Nov. . [] A. Ometov, S. V. Bezzateev, J. Kannisto, J. Harju, S. Andreev, and Y. Koucheryavy, “Facilitating the delegation of use for private devices in the era of the Internet of Wearable Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Aug. . [] C. Ma, Z. Yan, and C. W. Chen, “Scalable access control for privacy-aware media sharing,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. , no. , [] Z. Su, Y. Wang, Q. Xu, and N. Zhang, “LVBS: Lightweight vehicular blockchain for secure data sharing in disaster rescue,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jan./Feb. . [] G. Liang, S. R. Weller, J. Zhao, F. Luo, and Z. Y. Dong, “The  Ukraine blackout: Implications for false data injection attacks,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jul. . [] X. Liang, S. Shetty, D. Tosh, C. Kamhoua, K. Kwiat, and L. Njilla, “ProvChain: A blockchain-based data provenance architecture in cloud environment with enhanced privacy and availability,” in Proc. IEEE/ ACM Int. Symp. Clust. Cloud Grid Comput. (CCGRID), May , [] A. Hendaoui, M. Limayem, and C. W. Thompson, “3D social vir- tual worlds: Research issues and challenges,” IEEE Internet Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jan./Feb. . [] “The right of publicity: Likeness lawsuits against video game com- panies.” Accessed: Feb. , . [Online]. Available: https://btlj.org/ //the-right-of-publicity-likeness-lawsuits-against-video-game- [] S. Liao, J. Wu, A. K. Bashir, W. Yang, J. Li, and U. Tariq, “Digital twin consensus for blockchain-enabled intelligent transportation systems in smart cities,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., early access, Dec. , , doi: . [] T. Miyato, S.-I. Maeda, M. Koyama, and S. Ishii, “Virtual adversarial training: A regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. , no. , [] S. Mai, H. Hu, and S. Xing, “Modality to modality translation: An adversarial representation learning and graph fusion network for multimodal fusion,” in Proc. AAAI, , pp. –. [] J. Sun et al., “Stealthy and efﬁcient adversarial attacks against deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. AAAI, , pp. –. [] H. Zheng, Z. Zhang, J. Gu, H. Lee, and A. Prakash, “Efﬁcient adversar- ial training with transferable adversarial examples,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. , pp. –. [] C. Gehrmann and M. Gunnarsson, “A digital twin based industrial automation and control system security architecture,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jan. . [] R. Zimmermann and K. Liang, “Spatialized audio streaming for net- worked virtual environments,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia [] J.-M. Jot, R. Audfray, M. Hertensteiner, and B. Schmidt, “Rendering spatial sound for interoperable experiences in the audio metaverse,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Immersive 3D Audio (i3DA), Sep. , pp. –. [] P. Dickinson et al., “Experiencing simulated confrontations in virtual reality,” in Proc. ACM CHI Conf. Human Factors Comput. Syst. (CHI), [] Q. Xu, Z. Su, and R. Lu, “Game theory and reinforcement learning based secure edge caching in mobile social networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , pp. –, Mar. . [] Z. Su et al., “Secure and efﬁcient federated learning for smart grid with edge-cloud collaboration,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. , no. , [] Y. Han et al., “A dynamic hierarchical framework for IoT-assisted dig- ital twin synchronization in the metaverse,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, , doi: . [] K. Ruth, T. Kohno, and F. Roesner, “Secure multi-user content sharing for augmented reality applications,” in Proc. 28th USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security), Aug. , pp. –. [] H. Lee, J. Lee, D. Kim, S. Jana, I. Shin, and S. Son, “AdCube: WebVR ad fraud and practical conﬁnement of Third-Party ads,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security), Aug. , [] Z. Ning et al., “A cooperative quality-aware service access system for social Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , [] B. Satchidanandan and P. R. Kumar, “Dynamic watermarking: Active defense of networked cyber–Physical systems,” Proc. IEEE, vol. , [] M. Kamal and S. Tariq, “Light-weight security and data provenance for multi-hop Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. , pp. –, [] J. Wei, J. Li, Y. Lin, and J. Zhang, “LDP-based social content protection for trending topic recommendation,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Mar. . [] S. Wasserkrug, A. Gal, and O. Etzion, “Inference of security hazards from event composition based on incomplete or uncertain information,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] X. Li, J. He, P. Vijayakumar, X. Zhang, and V. Chang, “A ver- iﬁable privacy-preserving machine learning prediction scheme for edge-enhanced HCPSs,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. , no. , [] “General data protection regulation (GDPR).” Accessed: Mar. , . [Online]. Available: https://gdpr-info.eu/ [] E. Bertino and N. Islam, “Botnets and Internet of Things security,” Computer, vol. , no. , pp. –, Feb. . [] “Metaverse breached: Second Life customer database hacked.” [Online]. Available: https://techcrunch. com////metaverse-breached-second-life-customer-database- [] H. Song, T. Luo, X. Wang, and J. Li, “Multiple sensitive values-oriented personalized privacy preservation based on randomized response,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , pp. –, Dec. . [] Z. Wu, G. Li, Q. Liu, G. Xu, and E. Chen, “Covering the sensitive subjects to protect personal privacy in personalized recommenda- tion,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  [] S. Bono, D. Caselden, G. Landau, and C. Miller, “Reducing the attack surface in massively multiplayer Online role-playing games,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. , no. , pp. –, May/Jun. . [] B. Biggio and F. Roli, “Wild patterns: Ten years after the rise of adversarial machine learning,” Pattern Recognit., vol. , pp. –, [] K. Lebeck, K. Ruth, T. Kohno, and F. Roesner, “Towards security and privacy for multi-user augmented reality: Foundations with end users,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), , pp. –. [] J. Laakkonen, J. Parkkila, P. J´’appinen, J. Ikonen, and A. Seffah, “Incorporating privacy into digital game platform design: The what, why, and how,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. , no. , pp. –, [] P. M. Corcoran and C. Costache, “A privacy framework for games & interactive media,” in Proc. IEEE Games Entertainment Media Conf. [] D. Y. Zhang, Z. Kou, and D. Wang, “FedSens: A federated learning approach for smart health sensing with class imbalance in resource constrained edge computing,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. [] Z. Guan, Z. Wan, Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, and B. Huang, “BlockMaze: An efﬁcient privacy-preserving account-model blockchain based on zk-SNARKs,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , [] K. Xu, Y. Guo, L. Guo, Y. Fang, and X. Li, “My privacy my deci- sion: Control of photo sharing on Online social networks,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Mar./Apr. . [] R. Raguram, A. M. White, Y. Xu, J.-M. Frahm, P. Georgel, and F. Monrose, “On the privacy risks of virtual keyboards: Automatic reconstruction of typed input from compromising reﬂections,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] J. Mills, J. Hu, and G. Min, “Multi-task federated learning for person- alised deep neural networks in edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, Mar. . [] “The metaverse has a groping problem already (MIT technology review).” Accessed: Dec. , . www.technologyreview.com/////the-metaverse-has-a- [] “Meta establishes -foot “personal boundary” to deter VR groping.” [Online]. Available: https://arstechnica. com/gaming///meta-establishes-four-foot-personal-boundary-to- [] “The Privacy Sandbox.” Accessed: Mar. , . [Online]. Available: [] “Learning with privacy at scale.” Accessed: Mar. , . [Online]. Available: https://docs-assets.developer.apple.com/ml-research/papers/ learning-with-privacy-at-scale.pdf the metaverse: status, opportunities, and storage.” Accessed: Feb. , . [Online]. Available: https://www.hashkey.com/key-infrastructure-of- the-metaverse-status-opportunities-and-challenges-of-nft-data-storage/ [] J. Woodward and J. Ruiz, “Analytic review of using augmented reality for situational awareness,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics, early access, Jan. , , doi: . [] U. Ju, L. L. Chuang, and C. Wallraven, “Acoustic cues increase sit- uational awareness in accident situations: A VR car-driving study,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] Z. Lv, D. Chen, R. Lou, and H. Song, “Industrial security solution for virtual reality,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] L. Vu, V. L. Cao, Q. U. Nguyen, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, and E. Dutkiewicz, “Learning latent representation for IoT anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] M. Zhang, A. Raghunathan, and N. K. Jha, “MedMon: Securing medical devices through wireless monitoring and anomaly detec- tion,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] R. Heartﬁeld, G. Loukas, A. Bezemskij, and E. Panaousis, “Self- conﬁgurable cyber-physical intrusion detection for smart homes using reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , [] X. Zhou, W. Liang, S. Shimizu, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Siamese neural network based few-shot learning for anomaly detection in industrial cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. , no. , [] A. M. Zarca, J. B. Bernabe, A. Skarmeta, and J. M. A. Calero, “Virtual IoT honeynets to mitigate cyberattacks in SDN/NFV-enabled IoT networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] A. Shahsavari, M. Farajollahi, E. M. Stewart, E. Cortez, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Situational awareness in distribution grid using micro-PMU data: A machine learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. , no. , pp. –, Nov. . [] P. Krishnan et al., “MUD-based behavioral proﬁling security frame- work for software-deﬁned IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, May . [] W. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. He, and Z. Ding, “An IoT honeynet based on multiport honeypots for capturing IoT attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, May . [] J. Wu, K. Ota, M. Dong, J. Li, and H. Wang, “Big data analysis-based security situational awareness for smart grid,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. , no. , pp. –, Sep. . [] “Hackers exploited reentrancy vulnerability to attack Paraluni, making more than $. million.” Accessed: Mar. , . [Online]. Available: https://webscrypto.com/hackers-exploited-reentrancy-vulnerability-to- attack-paraluni-making-more-than-–-million-about-–-of-which- [] H. Ritzdorf, C. Soriente, G. O. Karame, S. Marinovic, D. Gruber, and S. Capkun, “Toward shared ownership in the cloud,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , no. , pp. –, Dec. . [] “Don’t get rugged: DeFi scams go from zero to $ million in a year to become top ﬁnancial hack.” Accessed: Aug. , . [Online]. Available: https://www.techrepublic.com/article/dont-get-rugged-deﬁ- scams-go-from-zero-to--million-in-a-year-to-become-top-ﬁnancial- [] M. Zhang, L. Yang, S. He, M. Li, and J. Zhang, “Privacy-preserving data aggregation for mobile crowdsensing with externality: An auction approach,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] Z. Xu and W. Liang, “Collusion-resistant repeated double auctions for relay assignment in cooperative networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. , no. , pp. –, Mar. . [] M. Li, J. Yu, and J. Wu, “Free-riding on BitTorrent-like peer-to-peer ﬁle sharing systems: Modeling analysis and improvement,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jul. . [] M. H. U. Rehman, K. Salah, E. Damiani, and D. Svetinovic, “Trust in blockchain cryptocurrency ecosystem,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. , no. , pp. –, Nov. . [] L. C. C. De Biase, P. C. Calcina-Ccori, G. Fedrecheski, G. M. Duarte, P. S. S. Rangel, and M. K. Zuffo, “Swarm economy: A model for transactions in a distributed and organic IoT platform,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jun. . [] C. Liu, Y. Xiao, V. Javangula, Q. Hu, S. Wang, and X. Cheng, “NormaChain: A blockchain-based normalized autonomous transaction settlement system for IoT-based E-commerce,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jun. . [] L. Jiang, H. Zheng, H. Tian, S. Xie, and Y. Zhang, “Cooperative feder- ated learning and model update veriﬁcation in blockchain empowered digital twin edge networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , [] A. Das and M. M. Islam, “SecuredTrust: A dynamic trust computation model for secured communication in multiagent systems,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Mar./Apr. . [] X. Wang, W. Cheng, P. Mohapatra, and T. Abdelzaher, “Enabling rep- utation and trust in privacy-preserving mobile sensing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Dec. . [] F. Wu, T. Zhang, C. Qiao, and G. Chen, “A strategy-proof auction mechanism for adaptive-width channel allocation in wireless networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] Y. Wang, Z. Su, T. Luan, R. Li, and K. Zhang, “Federated learning with fair incentives and robust aggregation for UAV-aided crowd- sensing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] Z. Wan, T. Zhang, W. Liu, M. Wang, and L. Zhu, “Decentralized blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. WANG et al.: SURVEY ON METAVERSE: FUNDAMENTALS, SECURITY, AND PRIVACY [] Y. Chen, X. Tian, Q. Wang, M. Li, M. Du, and Q. Li, “ARMOR: A secure combinatorial auction for heterogeneous spectrum,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Oct. . [] K. Shin, C. Joe-Wong, S. Ha, Y. Yi, I. Rhee, and D. S. Reeves, “T-Chain: A general incentive scheme for cooperative computing,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. , no. , pp. –, Aug. . [] M. Li, J. Weng, A. Yang, J.-N. Liu, and X. Lin, “Toward blockchain- based fair and anonymous ad dissemination in vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] R. Ma, S. Lee, J. Lui, and D. Yau, “Incentive and service differentiation in P2P networks: A game theoretic approach,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. , no. , pp. –, Oct. . [] H. Shen, Y. Lin, K. Sapra, and Z. Li, “Enhancing collusion resilience in reputation systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. , no. , [] J. Liu and B. Yang, “Collusion-resistant multicast key distribution based on homomorphic one-way function trees,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , no. , pp. –, Sep. . [] K. Li, S. Wang, X. Cheng, and Q. Hu, “A misreport- and collusion- proof crowdsourcing mechanism without quality veriﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Sep. . [] W. C. Ng, W. Y. B. Lim, J. S. Ng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, and C. Miao, “Uniﬁed resource allocation framework for the edge intelligence- enabled metaverse,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. [] Y. Jiang, J. Kang, D. Niyato, X. Ge, Z. Xiong, and C. Miao, “Reliable coded distributed computing for metaverse services: Coalition forma- tion and incentive mechanism design,” , arXiv:.. [] S. Mondal, K. P. Wijewardena, S. Karuppuswami, N. Kriti, D. Kumar, and P. Chahal, “Blockchain inspired RFID-based information architec- ture for food supply chain,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , [] Y. Wang et al., “Blockchain-based secure and cooperative private charging pile sharing services for vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. , no. , pp. –, Feb. . [] M. Baza, N. Lasla, M. M. E. A. Mahmoud, G. Srivastava, and M. Abdallah, “B-Ride: Ride sharing with privacy-preservation, trust and fair payment atop public blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. , no. , pp. –, Apr.-Jun. . [] Y. Zhou, F. R. Yu, J. Chen, and Y. Kuo, “Cyber-physical-social systems: A state-of-the-art survey, challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. , no. , pp. –, 1st Quart., . [] P. Casey, I. Baggili, and A. Yarramreddy, “Immersive virtual reality attacks and the human joystick,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Mar./Apr. . [] “Metaverse rollout brings new security risks, challenges.” Accessed: searchsecurity/news//Metaverse-rollout-brings-new- [] C. Vellaithurai, A. Srivastava, S. Zonouz, and R. Berthier, “CPIndex: Cyber-physical vulnerability assessment tures,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. , no. , pp. –, Mar. . [] S. Valluripally, A. Gulhane, K. A. Hoque, and P. Calyam, “Modeling and defense of social virtual reality attacks inducing cybersickness,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., early access, Oct. , , doi: . [] J. Zhu, P. Ni, and G. Wang, “Activity minimization of misinformation inﬂuence in Online social networks,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, Aug. . [] “The metaverse offers a future full of potential–For terrorists and extremists, too.” Accessed: Jan. , . [Online]. Available: https:/ /theconversation.com/the-metaverse-offers-a-future-full-of-potential- for-terrorists-and-extremists-too- [] P. Lau, L. Wang, Z. Liu, W. Wei, and C.-W. Ten, “A coalitional cyber-insurance design considering power system reliability and cyber vulnerability,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] S. Feng, W. Wang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and S. S. Wang, “On cyber risk management of blockchain networks: A game the- oretic approach,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. , no. , [] M. U. Tariq, J. Florence, and M. Wolf, “Improving the safety and secu- rity of wide-area cyber–Physical systems through a resource-aware, service-oriented development methodology,” Proc. IEEE, vol. , [] F.-y. wang, R. Qin, X. Wang, and B. Hu, “MetaSocieties in meta- verse: MetaEconomics and metamanagement for metaenterprises and metacities,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] “Improving user experience in our transfer your information tool.” Accessed: Oct. , . [Online]. Available: https://about.fb.com/news/ //improving-user-experience-in-our-transfer-your-information- [] V. Almeida, F. Filgueiras, and D. Doneda, “The ecosystem of digital content governance,” IEEE Internet Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] Y. Bai, Q. Hu, S.-H. Seo, K. Kang, and J. J. Lee, “Public participa- tion consortium blockchain for smart city governance,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Feb. . [] S. Sayeed, H. Marco-Gisbert, and T. Caira, “Smart contract: Attacks and protections,” IEEE Access, vol. , pp. –, Jan. . [] G. Huang, C. Luo, K. Wu, Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, and X. Liu, “Software- deﬁned infrastructure for decentralized data lifecycle governance: Principled design and open challenges,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), Jul. , pp. –. [] M. Li, J. Weng, J.-N. Liu, X. Lin, and C. Obimbo, “Toward vehicular digital forensics from decentralized trust: An accountable, privacy- preserving, and secure realization,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Sept./Oct. . [] X. He, Q. Gong, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, and X. Fu, “DatingSec: Detecting malicious accounts in dating apps using a content-based attention network,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Sep./Oct. . [] U. Gasser and V. A. Almeida, “A layered model for AI governance,” IEEE Internet Comput., vol. , no. , pp. –, Nov./Dec. . [] F. Zambonelli, F. Salim, S. W. Loke, W. De Meuter, and S. Kanhere, “Algorithmic governance in smart cities: The conundrum and the potential of pervasive computing solutions,” IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag., vol. , no. , pp. –, Jun. . [] B. Li, R. Lu, W. Wang, and K.-K. R. Choo, “DDOA: A Dirichlet- based detection scheme for opportunistic attacks in smart grid cyber- physical system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , no. , [] A. Swaminathan, M. Wu, and K. R. Liu, “Digital image forensics via intrinsic ﬁngerprints,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , no. , [] M. C. Stamm, W. S. Lin, and K. J. R. Liu, “Temporal forensics and anti- forensics for motion compensated video,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. , no. , pp. –, Aug. . [] D. Zou et al., “A multigranularity forensics and analysis method on privacy leakage in cloud environment,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. , no. , pp. –, Apr. . [] Z. Zhou, X. Kuang, L. Sun, L. Zhong, and C. Xu, “Endogenous secu- rity defense against deductive attack: When artiﬁcial intelligence meets active defense for Online service,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. , no. , [] Y. Cao, Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, J. Zhang, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “The evolution of quantum key distribution networks: On the road to the qinternet,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. , no. , pp. –, [] P. Frauenthaler, M. Sigwart, C. Spanring, “Testimonium: A cost-efﬁcient blockchain relay,” , arXiv:. Yuntao Wang received the Ph.D. degree from the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China. His research interests include security and privacy protection in general wireless networks and vehicular networks. Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. , NO. , FIRST QUARTER  Zhou Su (Senior Member, IEEE) has published SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, IEEE IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, nication, and network trafﬁc. He received the Best Paper Award of International Conference IEEE ICC2020, IEEE BigdataSE2019, and IEEE CyberSciTech2017. He is an Associate Editor of THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE OPEN JOURNAL OF COMPUTER SOCIETY, and Ning Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the University of Waterloo, Canada, in . He is an Associate Professor with the University of Windsor, Canada. He received the Best Paper Awards from IEEE Globecom in , IEEE WCSP in , and Journal of Communications and Information Networks in , IEEE ICC in , IEEE Technical Committee on Transmission Access and Optical Systems in , and IEEE ICCC in . He serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, IEEE ACCESS, and IET Communications, and Vehicular Communications (Elsevier); and a Guest Editor of several international jour- nals, such as IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING. He also serves/served as the Track international conferences and the Co-Chair for several Rui Xing is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China. His research interests include security protection and system optimization in wireless networks and vehicular Dongxiao Liu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Postdoctoral Fellow with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. His research interests include security and privacy in intelli- gent transportation systems, blockchain, and mobile Tom H. Luan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the University of Waterloo, Canada, in . He is currently a Professor with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, authored/coauthored more than  journal articles and  technical articles in conference proceedings. His research mainly focuses on content distribution and media streaming in vehicular ad hoc networks and peer-to-peer networking and the protocol design and performance evaluation of wireless cloud computing and edge computing. He awarded one U.S. patent. He served as a TPC Member for IEEE Globecom, ICC, and PIMRC. Xuemin (Sherman) Shen (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA, in . He is currently a University Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Canada. He is also a Registered Professional Engineer in ON, Canada. He is an Engineering Institute of Canada Fellow, a Canadian Academy of Engineering Fellow, a Royal Society of Canada Fellow, a Chinese Academy of Engineering Foreign Member, and a Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society and Communications Society. He received the R. A. Fessenden Award from IEEE, Canada, the Award of Merit from the Federation of Chinese Canadian Professionals, ON, Canada, in ; the Technical Recognition Award from the Wireless Communications Technical Committee in ; Evans Avant Garde Award from the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society in ; the Education Award in  and the Joseph LoCicero Award in  from the IEEE Communications Society; Committee in ; the Excellent Graduate Supervision Award from the University of Waterloo in ; and the Premier’s Research Excellence Award (PREA) from the Province of Ontario, Canada, in . He served as the Technical Program Committee Chair/Co-Chair for IEEE Globecom’, IEEE Infocom’, IEEE VTC’ Fall, and IEEE Globecom’, and the Chair for the IEEE Communications Society Technical Committee on Wireless Communications. He was the Vice President for the Technical and Educational Activities and Publications, a Member-at-Large on the Board of Governors, and the Chair of the Distinguished Lecturer Selection Committee. He is also the President Elect of the IEEE Communications Society. He served as the Editor-in-Chief for IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE NETWORK, and IET Communications. Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND GALWAY. Downloaded on April , at :: UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.